                      The Causal Memory and Credit Protocol
   Exactly-Once Assimilation of Causal Innovation through Persistent Shared Memory, Sparse
                         Credit Transport, and Information Geometry


                                               Ben Goertzel

                                        Working draft - July 2026


Abstract. Adaptive systems must reuse stable knowledge across contexts while continuing to learn from
new evidence. Existing approaches typically conflate three operations: reading a shared mechanism, as-
signing credit to it, and treating an incoming signal as new evidence about it. This conflation produces two
complementary failures. Local learners may not deliver useful credit to distant mechanisms, while global
credit channels may rewrite many modules with correlated copies of the same causal contribution. The re-
sult is credit starvation on one side and diffuse interference, evidence double counting, and order-dependent
forgetting on the other.
This paper proposes the Causal Memory and Credit Protocol (CMCP), a domain-general protocol for
learning systems in which shared mechanisms are represented once, reused broadly, and modified only by
causally attributable innovation. CMCP separates a representation plane, a credit plane, and an evidence-
ledger plane. Persistent shared memory is read-many but write-gated. A sparse credit-only highway trans-
ports mechanism-indexed learning signals without becoming an additional dependency in the forward model.
An evidence ledger residualizes incoming signals against what has already been assimilated and distinguishes
shared innovation, local exceptions, redundant manifestations, genuinely new mechanisms, and mechanism
drift.
The protocol’s core mechanism-matching problem is formulated information-geometrically. Local mecha-
nisms are represented by natural-gradient credit vectors and tuples of Fisher, generalized Gauss-Newton,
Hessian, or linearized-dynamics operators. Metric-aware intertwiners align these operators across contexts;
trace-word fingerprints provide coordinate-invariant retrieval keys; commutators and holonomy diagnose
path-dependent re-encoding. A central refinement is that directional projection alone is not a valid novelty
test: independent repeated evidence may lie in an already known direction and should still increase pre-
cision. CMCP therefore combines orthogonal directional novelty with a conditional-information residual,
expressed locally by a Schur complement of score covariances. The resulting protocol aims for exactly-once
assimilation of each causal innovation, not exactly-once use of each sample.
We state operational contracts, give a generic algorithm, describe scalable approximations based on Hessian-
vector products and stochastic trace estimation, and propose falsifiable experiments spanning continual learn-
ing, reinforcement learning, world models, control, federated systems, scientific model revision, and au-
tonomous agents.
Keywords: causal memory; credit assignment; continual learning; information geometry; Fisher informa-
tion; curvature; holonomy; modular learning; evidence accounting; mechanism reuse




                                                      1
1. Introduction
A capable adaptive system should be able to learn a stable mechanism once, reuse it in many situations,
and revise it when genuinely new evidence arrives. These goals sound compatible, but ordinary learning
architectures often bind them together in a damaging way. A parameter, expert, skill, model component, or
memory item that is broadly reusable is also exposed to broad plasticity. Every context that reads it may
generate another update to it. Conversely, a mechanism protected from interference may become difficult to
reach with useful learning signals.
This tension appears in many forms. In deep local learning, credit from a high-level discrepancy may decay
before it reaches an early mechanism. In continual learning, a global gradient can alter parameters unrelated
to the current causal error. In modular systems, multiple experts may learn redundant versions of the same
cause. In replay systems, correlated manifestations of one event may be treated as independent evidence.
In agents with long-term memory, semantically similar episodes may be repeatedly consolidated even when
they contain no new information. In scientific model revision, the same anomaly may enter through several
data products and be counted multiple times. These are not merely optimization failures. They are failures
to distinguish computational reuse from statistical assimilation.
The motivating principle of this paper is therefore:
      Shared knowledge should be broadly readable but narrowly writable; error should be
      globally observable but locally actionable.
The Causal Memory and Credit Protocol (CMCP) combines two architectural ideas. The first is persistent
shared causal memory: a stable mechanism is represented once, can be queried by many contexts, and
has explicit write permissions and provenance. The second is a causal credit-only highway: high-level
discrepancy is factorized into mechanism-indexed credit, transported directly to responsible modules, and
used to modify plasticity without necessarily creating a new forward or generative dependency. The highway
addresses credit reach. The memory supplies the reference needed to decide what is already known. Their
combination turns learning into an evidence-assimilation protocol rather than an unstructured sequence of
parameter updates.
The phrase causal is used here in an operational, intervention-oriented sense. A module is causally respon-
sible for a discrepancy to the extent that controlled change to that module can change the relevant outcome.
CMCP does not claim that second-order geometry alone solves unrestricted causal discovery from observa-
tional data. Instead, it divides the problem into two parts:
1. Geometry identifies and aligns candidate mechanism subspaces. It determines whether local learning
   systems are the same up to a change of coordinates, whether their evidence directions overlap, and whether
   their transports are path-dependent.
2. Intervention or credible invariance evidence orients causal responsibility. It determines whether
   changing a candidate module can actually reduce the discrepancy and therefore whether the module may
   receive write credit.
This division makes the difficult matching problem substantially more tractable. Around an operating point,
a mechanism is not represented only by an activation embedding. It is represented by its local sensitivity,
curvature, contraction, and interference structure. Natural-gradient Hessians, generalized Gauss-Newton
matrices, empirical Fisher operators, Jacobian Gramians, and linearized transition operators are all possible
second-order signatures. Under suitable regularity, tuples of self-adjoint operators can be matched up to
isometry by coordinate-invariant trace data; their commutators expose the failure of simultaneous alignment
and the curvature of the task connection [1], [2].


                                                       2
CMCP also sharpens what novel evidence must mean. A naive memory system might project incoming
credit onto the complement of the stored mechanism subspace and discard the parallel component. That is
wrong. A second independent measurement of the same mechanism lies in the same direction but should
increase confidence. An exact duplicate or a correlated descendant of a previously assimilated observation
should not. The correct distinction is not simply new direction versus old direction. It is:
• directional novelty: does the evidence concern a previously unrepresented mechanism direction?
• evidential novelty: conditional on the information already stored, does the observation carry additional
  information within an existing mechanism direction?
We give a local information-geometric answer using residualized score variables and a conditional Fisher
information matrix. Exact duplicate manifestations have zero conditional information; conditionally inde-
pendent repeated observations retain their information; partial redundancy is attenuated continuously.
The paper makes six contributions.
1. It defines CMCP as a three-plane architecture separating representation, credit transport, and evidence
   accounting.
2. It formulates mechanism identity and transport through information geometry, operator intertwiners, in-
   variant fingerprints, commutators, and holonomy.
3. It introduces a two-part novelty operator combining orthogonal mechanism discovery with conditional
   information within known mechanisms.
4. It states protocol contracts for causal idempotence, independent-evidence accumulation, modular com-
   mutation, coordinate equivariance, path consistency, and write safety.
5. It gives a generic algorithm and practical approximations that do not require dense Hessians.
6. It proposes a cross-domain experimental program designed to falsify the protocol’s core claims rather
   than merely report end-task accuracy.
The proposal builds on a broader geometric view of continual learning in which metric anisotropy and con-
nection curvature are distinct failure channels [3], [4], and on the idea of a causally designed error highway
that transmits novelty-filtered residuals to modules with evidence of causal responsibility [5]. The present
paper elevates these ideas into a general learning protocol and adds the information-geometric mechanism-
matching and conditional-novelty machinery needed to make the combination coherent.


2. Problem Setting
2.1 Adaptive systems, contexts, and mechanisms
Let an adaptive system encounter a sequence of contexts 𝑐 ∈ 𝒞. A context may be a task, environment, user,
scientific regime, sensory condition, episode, dataset shard, control mode, or conversational situation. The
system contains a collection of candidate mechanisms or modules 𝑚 ∈ ℳ. A module may be a parameter
block, expert, skill, transition model, rule, program fragment, memory record, controller component, or
causal hypothesis.
The system produces an outcome through a context-dependent computation


                                            𝑦 = 𝑓𝑐 (𝑥; 𝜃𝑆 , 𝜃𝐿,𝑐 ),

where 𝜃𝑆 denotes parameters of persistent shared mechanisms and 𝜃𝐿,𝑐 denotes context-local or provisional
parameters. A discrepancy signal 𝑒𝑐 may be a supervised error, temporal-difference error, prediction er-


                                                      3
ror, reconstruction residual, constraint violation, reward-model critique, model-checking counterexample,
or mismatch between experimental prediction and observation.
A conventional learner maps 𝑒𝑐 to a parameter update. CMCP inserts an explicit protocol between them.
The protocol must answer four questions:
1. Identity: Which stored mechanism, if any, does this signal concern?
2. Responsibility: Which modules can causally change the relevant outcome?
3. Novelty: What part of the signal has not already been assimilated?
4. Destination: Should the innovation revise shared memory, remain local, create a new mechanism, or
   trigger a branch for drift?
These questions are logically distinct. Treating them as one gradient operation is the source of many failure
modes.

2.2 Four recurring failure modes
Credit starvation
When learning is implemented through local reciprocal interactions, a high-level discrepancy may reach a
distant module only through the inverse of a local self-adjoint operator. Such inverses are localized when the
operator is well conditioned; preserving long reach can require slow, nearly critical dynamics [3], [6], [7].
The system then faces a reach-versus-conditioning tradeoff: either inference converges quickly and distant
mechanisms receive little task information, or information propagates far only through slow relaxation.

Diffuse credit and entanglement
A naive solution is to broadcast the full discrepancy to many modules. This improves reach, but unrelated
modules receive the same plasticity signal. Shared causes can be redundantly encoded through several routes,
task updates become noncommuting, and subsequent learning depends on curriculum order. Direct feedback
methods demonstrate that long-range learning channels can be useful, but a metric-blind broadcast does not
by itself solve causal routing [5], [8].

Evidence miscounting
Even if all updates use the same coordinates and commute, the system may assign the wrong effective mul-
tiplicity to evidence. Replay, duplicated records, correlated sensor products, multiple descendants of one
event, or repeated traversal of a cached trajectory can give one innovation excessive precision. Conversely,
aggressive protection can undercount legitimate new evidence. This is a symmetric accounting problem: the
system uses a known direction too many or too few effective times [4].

Frame mismatch and path-dependent reuse
The same causal mechanism may be represented differently across contexts. Updating in context 𝑠 can
change the coordinates in which context 𝑡 expresses its evidence. If the corresponding local update operators
do not commute, the meaning of the second update depends on the first. Infinitesimally this is curvature;
over a finite context loop it is holonomy [2], [3]. This is not simply duplicate evidence. It is a failure to
recognize the same mechanism after transport through different representational frames.




                                                      4
2.3 The design objective
CMCP aims to provide all of the following simultaneously:
• long-range credit reach without full-error broadcast;
• reusable shared mechanisms without repeated assimilation of the same innovation;
• accumulation of genuinely independent evidence even when it concerns an existing direction;
• local storage of exceptions and context-specific residuals;
• coordinate-invariant mechanism matching across representations;
• path-consistent transport when possible, and explicit curvature accounting when it is not;
• auditable write decisions with provenance and reversible consolidation.
The desired endpoint is not zero coupling. It is sparse, explicit, and interpretable coupling: strong com-
munication through a small shared causal backbone, weak cross-talk elsewhere, and a ledger that records
why each protected shared mechanism changed.


3. The Three-Plane Architecture
CMCP separates learning into a representation plane, a credit plane, and an evidence-ledger plane. The
separation is conceptual; implementations may share data structures or hardware.




Figure 1: The three-plane CMCP architecture. Persistent memory and local modules participate in forward compu-
tation. High-level discrepancies are encoded, geometrically aligned, causally routed, novelty-filtered, and delivered
through a credit-only highway. The evidence ledger decides whether to suppress, localize, provisionally store, pro-
mote, branch, or allocate.




                                                         5
3.1 Representation or data plane
The representation plane performs the task. It contains two broad classes of adaptive state.
Persistent shared causal memory. A shared memory item represents a stable mechanism that many con-
texts may query. It is read-heavy and write-gated. Its state includes not only model parameters but also an
information ledger, a geometric signature, provenance, uncertainty, and lifecycle status.
Context-local or provisional state. Local adapters, episodic slots, expert-specific parameters, cached plans,
or temporary hypotheses absorb context-specific evidence. They are easier to modify and discard. They
protect the shared core from premature consolidation.
A useful memory record has the abstract form


                                      𝑀𝑗 = (𝜃𝑗 , 𝒮𝑗 , Λ𝑗 , 𝜒𝑗 , 𝒫𝑗 , 𝑣𝑗 ),

where 𝜃𝑗 is the represented mechanism, 𝒮𝑗 is its local information subspace, Λ𝑗 is an accumulated precision
or evidence ledger, 𝜒𝑗 is a coordinate-invariant geometric fingerprint, 𝒫𝑗 is provenance, and 𝑣𝑗 is a version
or consolidation state.
The central architectural distinction is:
      Reading a mechanism is a computational operation. Writing it is an evidential claim.
Many contexts may use 𝑀𝑗 during forward computation. Only a signal that passes identity, responsibility,
novelty, and safety tests may revise it.

3.2 Credit plane
The credit plane converts a high-level discrepancy into sparse, mechanism-indexed learning signals. Its main
components are:
1. Credit encoder or factorizer. It decomposes a discrepancy into candidate components

                                       𝑧𝑐 = 𝐶𝜙 (𝑒𝑐 , 𝑐) = (𝑧𝑐,1 , … , 𝑧𝑐,𝐾 ),
   intended to separate shared, local, and nuisance contributions.
2. Geometric matcher. It compares local information operators with memory fingerprints, retrieves candi-
   date mechanisms, and estimates metric-aware transport maps.
3. Responsibility router. It estimates whether intervention on a candidate module can reduce a component
   of the discrepancy.
4. Credit-only highway. It sends the residualized innovation directly to selected modules as a plasticity
   signal.
The highway is credit-only when it changes learning updates, eligibility traces, precision, or consolidation
gates without becoming a new dependency in the forward generative model. This is the safest default be-
cause it improves credit reach while preserving the represented computation and its fixed points as much
as possible [5]. A state-coupling highway may be justified when the long-range dependency is itself a real
shared mechanism, but it creates a stronger burden of audit.
For a receiving module 𝑚, a generic highway update is

                                     hw
                                   Δ𝜃𝑚  = −𝜂 𝑏𝑚,𝑐 𝑅𝑚,𝑐 𝑇𝑚←𝑐 𝒩𝑚 (𝑧𝑐 ),

                                                       6
where 𝑅𝑚,𝑐 is a responsibility gate, 𝑇𝑚←𝑐 transports the credit into the module’s coordinates and metric,
𝒩𝑚 is the novelty operator, and 𝑏𝑚,𝑐 enforces bandwidth or write budgets.

3.3 Evidence-ledger or write plane
The evidence-ledger plane decides what the incoming signal means statistically. It performs the following
operations:
1. retrieve candidate memory records;
2. align the incoming information geometry with each candidate;
3. estimate causal responsibility;
4. residualize against already assimilated evidence;
5. classify the residual;
6. stage, commit, merge, split, branch, or reject a write;
7. update provenance and diagnostic state.
The classification has at least five outcomes.

Incoming signal                      Interpretation                      Default action
High mechanism match,                Repeated manifestation or           Read only; no shared rewrite
negligible conditional               already explained reuse
information
High mechanism match,                New evidence about an existing      Provisional shared write; update
substantial conditional              shared mechanism                    precision
information
Responsible but context-specific     Exception, regime, policy, or       Write to local adapter or episodic
residual                             local mapping                       slot
Low match with coherent              New mechanism                       Allocate a new memory item
responsibility
High prior match but persistent      Mechanism change or                 Branch/version, then reconcile
coherent geometric drift             nonstationarity


This write plane is what allows the same highway to carry strong long-range credit without converting every
global discrepancy into a global parameter update.

3.4 Two-stage commitment
A robust implementation should normally use a two-stage commit.
Stage 1: provisional assimilation. New information is placed in a local adapter, shadow copy, or provisional
memory slot. The system records its geometric signature, responsibility estimate, and provenance but does
not yet overwrite the protected shared mechanism.
Stage 2: promotion. The provisional innovation is promoted when it recurs across sufficiently diverse
contexts, survives intervention tests, remains stable under coordinate transport, and improves prediction or
control without creating broad interference.
Promotion may merge the provisional slot into shared memory, create a new shared module, or leave it
local. This delay limits memory poisoning, router self-confirmation, and premature treatment of a transient
correlation as a shared cause.

                                                      7
4. Information-Geometric Formulation
The core technical problem is to recognize a mechanism across contexts that may use different parameter-
izations, activations, features, or local modules. Raw parameter distance and embedding cosine similarity
are not reliable because they change under reparameterization and can ignore how the system actually learns.
CMCP instead compares local learning geometry.

4.1 Local credit and information operators
Let Θ be a smooth parameter manifold equipped with a positive metric 𝑔. In a statistical model, 𝑔 is naturally
the Fisher-Rao metric [9], [10], [11]. In a control system it may be a controllability or sensitivity metric. In
a deterministic learner it may be a generalized Gauss-Newton, empirical Fisher, Jacobian Gram, or carefully
chosen preconditioner.
For context 𝑐 with loss or discrepancy functional 𝐿𝑐 , define the metric credit vector


                                       𝑢𝑐 = − grad𝑔 𝐿𝑐 = −𝑔−1 𝑑𝐿𝑐 ,

and the local information operator


                                              𝐻𝑐 = ∇𝑔 grad𝑔 𝐿𝑐 .

Near a local solution, 𝐻𝑐 is the natural-gradient Hessian. It is self-adjoint in 𝑔 and, for a locally fitted loss,
is typically positive semidefinite. Training for a short duration ℎ acts on a perturbation approximately as
exp(−ℎ𝐻𝑐 ).
A single operator describes only one local quadratic form. Mechanism identity is better represented by a
tuple


                                              H𝑐 = (𝐻𝑐,𝑎 )𝑎∈𝒜 ,

where 𝑎 indexes output components, controlled probes, environments, interventions, temporal phases, or
neighboring contexts. The tuple captures how a candidate mechanism responds across a small family of
conditions.

4.2 Mechanism identity up to geometric gauge
Suppose contexts 𝑐 and 𝑑 realize the same mechanism in local spaces 𝐸𝑐 and 𝐸𝑑 . The natural equivalence
is not equality of parameter vectors. It is the existence of an isometry or well-conditioned partial isometry
𝑄 ∶ 𝐸𝑐 → 𝐸𝑑 such that

                                       𝐻𝑑,𝑎 ≈ 𝑄𝐻𝑐,𝑎 𝑄∗ ,          𝑎 ∈ 𝒜.

This is simultaneous operator alignment. It says that the two local learning systems are the same up to their
natural coordinate gauge.
For finite-dimensional tuples of self-adjoint operators, all noncommutative trace words


                                                        8
                                       Tr 𝑤(H) = Tr(𝐻𝑎1 𝐻𝑎2 ⋯ 𝐻𝑎𝑘 )

form a complete invariant for simultaneous orthogonal equivalence when taken to sufficient degree. Equiv-
alently, curriculum characters obtained from traces of products of local flow operators determine the tuple
up to isometry under the conditions developed in the transfer-rigidity analysis [1]. This suggests a practical,
coordinate-invariant memory key:


                                      𝜒𝐿 (H) = {Tr 𝑤(H) ∶ |𝑤| ≤ 𝐿} .

Complete high-degree signatures are expensive, but low-degree fingerprints are already informative in
generic settings. A coarse retrieval index can include
• Tr(𝐻𝑎 ) and Tr(𝐻𝑎2 );
• pairwise overlaps Tr(𝐻𝑎 𝐻𝑏 );
• commutator energies ‖[𝐻𝑎 , 𝐻𝑏 ]‖2 ;
• selected degree-three and degree-four trace words;
• low-rank spectral summaries and subspace principal angles.
The geometric key does not have to replace semantic or content-based retrieval. It can be used after a semantic
shortlist to answer the more specific question: do these candidate records implement the same local learning
mechanism?

4.3 Metric-aware transport as approximate intertwining
After retrieving a candidate memory item 𝑀𝑗 , the protocol estimates a transport map 𝑇𝑗←𝑐 . A generic
objective is

                                                        2                         2
                ℒalign (𝑇 ) = ∑ ∥𝐻𝑗,𝑎 𝑇 − 𝑇 𝐻𝑐,𝑎 ∥             + 𝜆𝑔 ∥𝑇 ∗ 𝑔𝑗 𝑇 − 𝑔𝑐 ∥ + 𝜆𝑟 Ω(𝑇 ).
                                                        𝐹 ,𝑔                      𝐹
                              𝑎∈𝒜

The first term asks 𝑇 to intertwine the operator tuples. The second makes it approximately metric preserving.
The regularizer Ω can enforce low rank, sparsity, locality, orthogonality, or a partial-isometry constraint.
When dimensions differ, 𝑇 maps only the matched mechanism subspace.
This transport is the connection of the protocol. It allows an innovation expressed in context 𝑐 to be compared
with and applied to a memory record written in another frame. Exact intertwining is a strong condition;
approximate intertwining is enough to provide a confidence score and an error budget.

4.4 Symmetric information and antisymmetric path dependence
The self-adjoint operators 𝐻𝑐 lie in the symmetric part of the local operator algebra. Their commutators


                                                  𝐶𝑠𝑡 = [𝐻𝑠 , 𝐻𝑡 ]

are anti-self-adjoint. This is the Cartan split


                                       𝔤𝔩(𝐸) = Sym(𝐸, 𝑔) ⊕ 𝔰𝔬(𝐸, 𝑔).

                                                         9
The split has a direct protocol interpretation.
• The symmetric component records contraction, precision, evidence accumulation, and the strength of
  local learning directions. It belongs in the memory ledger.
• The antisymmetric component records rotation, order dependence, and the obstruction to using one com-
  mon coordinate frame. It belongs in the transport and curvature audit.
For a curriculum Γ = (𝑐1 , ℎ1 ) ⋯ (𝑐𝑁 , ℎ𝑁 ), the linearized update is


                                        𝑀 (Γ) = 𝑒−ℎ𝑁 𝐻𝑐𝑁 ⋯ 𝑒−ℎ1 𝐻𝑐1 .

Its polar decomposition


                                            𝑀 (Γ) = Hol(Γ) 𝑃 (Γ)

separates a positive symmetric factor 𝑃 , describing convergence and accumulated contraction, from an or-
thogonal factor Hol, describing order-dependent rotation [2]. CMCP treats these as separate control channels.
Precision and schedule methods correct the symmetric ledger. Causal modularization and transport methods
correct the connection.




Figure 2: Information-geometric interpretation of CMCP. Contexts form a base manifold; local credit and information
operators live in fibers; a learned connection transports them. Route mismatch is holonomy.


4.5 Curvature, commutators, and the interference Gram
For a small two-context loop, the leading rotational defect is proportional to the commutator:


                                       log Hol(𝑠, 𝑡) ≈ 21 ℎ𝑠 ℎ𝑡 [𝐻𝑠 , 𝐻𝑡 ].



                                                        10
Under a one-statistical-model, many-operating-points approximation, this commutator is the Fisher-Rao cur-
vature contracted against the area spanned by the task displacements, up to model and higher-order defects
[3], [4]. The commutator is therefore a local measure of whether two contexts re-express shared evidence in
incompatible frames.
For many contexts, define the interference Gram


                                  𝐺(𝑖𝑗),(𝑘𝑙) = − Tr ([𝐻𝑖 , 𝐻𝑗 ][𝐻𝑘 , 𝐻𝑙 ]) .

Its diagonal measures the strength of each pairwise conflict. Its off-diagonal entries measure whether differ-
ent conflicts occupy the same rotation planes. A low-rank Gram indicates that one shared transport correction
or module boundary may repair several conflicts; a near-diagonal Gram suggests separate interventions [2].
The goal is not necessarily to make every commutator zero. Genuine shared mechanisms can create struc-
tured overlap. The goal is to transform broad, incoherent interference into a small set of explicit shared
planes and make unrelated mechanisms approximately commute.


5. Novelty: Direction Is Not Evidence
Mechanism matching answers where an incoming signal belongs. It does not yet answer whether the signal
contains new evidence. This section develops the central evidence-accounting rule.

5.1 Why orthogonal projection is insufficient
Let 𝒮𝑗 be the information subspace already associated with memory item 𝑀𝑗 . After transport, a simple
residual would be

                                          ⟂               𝑔
                                         𝜈𝑗,𝑐 = (𝐼 − Π𝒮𝑗𝑗 )𝑇𝑗←𝑐 𝜈𝑐 .

This correctly detects a new mechanism direction. But it incorrectly treats all evidence parallel to 𝒮𝑗 as
redundant. Consider two cases:
• the incoming record is an exact copy of a previously assimilated observation;
• the incoming record is an independent new measurement generated by the same mechanism.
Both lie in the same local direction. The first should not increase precision. The second should. Directional
projection cannot distinguish them.
CMCP therefore separates directional novelty from evidential novelty.

5.2 Conditional score residualization
Let 𝑠𝑐 be a local score or sensitivity statistic for the incoming evidence after transport into the candidate
memory frame. Let 𝑠𝑀 be a vector of score statistics or sufficient-statistic summaries already represented
in the memory ledger. Define


                     𝐹𝑐𝑐 = 𝔼[𝑠𝑐 𝑠∗𝑐 ],    𝐹𝑀𝑀 = 𝔼[𝑠𝑀 𝑠∗𝑀 ],            𝐹𝑐𝑀 = 𝔼[𝑠𝑐 𝑠∗𝑀 ].

The best linear prediction of 𝑠𝑐 from stored evidence in the information metric is

                                                     11
                                                       †
                                            𝑠𝑐̂ = 𝐹𝑐𝑀 𝐹𝑀𝑀 𝑠𝑀 .

The residual score and its conditional information are

                                                         †
                                        𝑠𝑐∣𝑀
                                         ̃   = 𝑠𝑐 − 𝐹𝑐𝑀 𝐹𝑀𝑀 𝑠𝑀 ,

                                                        †
                                      𝐹𝑐∣𝑀 = 𝐹𝑐𝑐 − 𝐹𝑐𝑀 𝐹𝑀𝑀 𝐹𝑀𝑐 .

The second expression is the Schur complement of the stored score block. It is positive semidefinite under the
usual covariance assumptions. It quantifies locally how much information remains after linearly conditioning
on what memory already represents.
This gives three important regimes.
Exact duplicate manifestation. If 𝑠𝑐 = 𝐴𝑠𝑀 almost surely for a stored linear map 𝐴, then 𝐹𝑐∣𝑀 = 0.
The incoming record has no residual information and should not rewrite shared memory.
Independent repeated observation. If the new observation concerns the same mechanism but is condi-
tionally independent of stored observations given the mechanism, then 𝐹𝑐𝑀 = 0 in the idealized score
representation and 𝐹𝑐∣𝑀 = 𝐹𝑐𝑐 . Its full information should be added to the precision ledger.
Partial redundancy. If the observation is correlated with stored evidence but not determined by it, then


                                             0 ⪯ 𝐹𝑐∣𝑀 ⪯ 𝐹𝑐𝑐 .

The protocol discounts only the predictable component.
This is an 𝐿2 local residual. In non-Gaussian or strongly nonlinear settings it can be replaced or supplemented
by conditional mutual information, kernel conditional covariance, learned density-ratio residualization, or a
predictive coding model of stored evidence. The key requirement is the same: novelty must be conditioned
on the evidence ledger, not inferred from direction alone.

5.3 The innovation packet
For candidate memory 𝑀𝑗 , CMCP forms an innovation packet

                                          ⟂
                                 ℐ𝑗,𝑐 = (𝜈𝑗,𝑐 , 𝑠𝑐∣𝑀
                                                 ̃ 𝑗 , 𝐹𝑐∣𝑀𝑗 , 𝑟𝑗,𝑐 , 𝑞𝑗,𝑐 ) ,

where 𝑟𝑗,𝑐 is causal responsibility and 𝑞𝑗,𝑐 summarizes transport and match quality.
The first component opens new mechanism directions. The second and third update precision and suffi-
cient statistics within an existing direction. The last two control whether the write is causally justified and
geometrically reliable.
A local quadratic or exponential-family memory can update natural parameters as


                                    Λ+                           ∗
                                     𝑗 = Λ𝑗 + 𝛼 𝑟𝑗,𝑐 𝑇𝑗←𝑐 𝐹𝑐∣𝑀𝑗 𝑇𝑗←𝑐 ,



                                                      12
                                       𝜂𝑗+ = 𝜂𝑗 + 𝛼 𝑟𝑗,𝑐 𝑇𝑗←𝑐 𝑞𝑐∣𝑀
                                                               ̃ 𝑗,

with 𝜃𝑗+ recovered from the memory’s natural parameterization. In a generic optimizer, the same idea be-
comes a preconditioned proximal step using Λ𝑗 as the consolidation metric.
The rule is deliberately asymmetric between reads and writes. A context may read the full shared mechanism
even when 𝐹𝑐∣𝑀𝑗 = 0. It simply does not add another copy of the same evidence.


5.4 Exactly once per causal innovation
The phrase exactly-once assimilation can be misunderstood. It does not mean that a data point may be
processed only once. It means:
      Each causally distinct innovation should contribute once to the shared evidence ledger, while
      each conditionally independent measurement may contribute its own information.
This is closer to deduplicated sufficient-statistic accumulation than to sample suppression. It preserves sta-
tistical efficiency while preventing a single innovation from gaining artificial confidence through many cor-
related representations.

5.5 Drift, contradiction, and branching
A persistent discrepancy with high responsibility can mean several different things:
• the current memory is uncertain and should gain precision;
• a context variable is missing;
• the environment has changed;
• two regimes require separate mechanisms;
• the observation is corrupted or adversarial.
CMCP should not force all such cases into one wider or less certain shared state. The geometric and evidential
signatures help distinguish them.
• Stable operator signature, new conditional information: update the existing mechanism.
• Stable shared core plus systematic local residual: create or retain a context-local adapter.
• Coherent temporal drift of the operator tuple: branch the mechanism version and maintain a transition
  model between versions.
• Multimodal incompatible signatures: split or allocate separate mechanisms.
• Low responsibility or poor provenance: quarantine or reject the write.
This lifecycle treats memory revision as model selection under causal and geometric constraints rather than
as unrestricted parameter motion.


6. Causal Responsibility and Sparse Routing
Information geometry can identify candidate mechanism equivalence classes and coordinate transforms. It
does not, by itself, determine the causal arrow. A symmetric Hessian reveals interaction and sensitivity, not
whether intervention on a module changes the outcome of interest. CMCP therefore requires a responsibility
estimator.



                                                     13
6.1 Intervention-sensitive responsibility
A conceptual responsibility score is

                                                         𝜕 do(𝑦𝑗 )
                                            𝑟𝑚,𝑐,𝑗 ≈ ∥             ∥,
                                                         𝜕 do(ℎ𝑚 )

where ℎ𝑚 is the represented variable or output of module 𝑚. Practical estimates can use:
• controlled parameter or activation perturbations;
• counterfactual prediction by a learned world model;
• environment invariance and mechanism-change tests;
• influence functions or Jacobian-vector products;
• sparse do-influence masks learned under intervention supervision;
• temporal precedence plus action-conditioned transition evidence;
• randomized routing probes with held-out effect measurement.
The score should be calibrated against an observed reduction in the relevant discrepancy, not merely against
gradient magnitude. A module can have a large correlational gradient because it is a descendant or proxy
while lacking the capacity to intervene on the source of error.

6.2 Factorized credit
The high-level discrepancy should be decomposed before routing:


                                        𝑒𝑐 = 𝑒shared
                                              𝑐      + 𝑒local
                                                        𝑐     + 𝑒nuisance
                                                                 𝑐        .

This decomposition may be explicit in a structured model or learned through sparse latent factors. Shared
components are candidates for persistent memory. Local components belong in adapters or episodic state.
Nuisance components are suppressed or routed only to noise models.
A useful training objective combines task performance with routing supervision:


       ℒ = ℒtask + 𝜆do ℒresponsibility + 𝜆path ℒpath + 𝜆nov ℒnovelty + 𝜆shadow ℒshadow + 𝜆budget ℒsparsity .

The path term penalizes disagreement between alternative transport routes. The novelty term penalizes rewrit-
ing memory with predictable evidence. The shadow term penalizes unintended commutators outside desig-
nated shared subspaces. The budget limits active routes and write bandwidth.

6.3 Why the highway should usually be credit-only
A long-range state connection changes the function or dynamical system being represented. That may be
desirable, but it can also create a new causal shortcut and entangle mechanisms that the memory architecture
was intended to separate. A credit-only highway instead modifies local plasticity, eligibility, precision, or
inference updates while leaving the forward graph unchanged during ordinary operation.
This distinction generalizes beyond neural networks.
• In reinforcement learning, a highway may carry a factorized TD innovation to a dynamics module without
  adding that module as a new policy input.

                                                        14
• In a scientific model, it may route an anomaly to the responsible submodel without adding an empirical
  correction term to every prediction.
• In a database-backed agent, it may change consolidation priority without injecting the retrieved memory
  into all future prompts.
• In control, it may update a local model or gain schedule without adding a permanent sensor-to-actuator
  shortcut.
A state-coupling extension should be promoted only when the new dependency has passed the same causal,
novelty, and invariance tests as any other shared mechanism.


7. Protocol Contracts
A protocol is useful when it defines behavior that can be tested independently of a particular implementation.
CMCP proposes the following contracts.

7.1 Causal idempotence
For a repeated manifestation 𝑑 whose conditional information given memory is negligible,


                                         𝑈𝑑 (𝑈𝑑 (𝑀 )) ≈ 𝑈𝑑 (𝑀 ).

The approximation allows numerical noise and bounded adaptation, but the second presentation should not
add another full unit of shared precision.

7.2 Independent-evidence accumulation
For a conditionally independent observation 𝑑′ of an existing mechanism,


                                     Λ(𝑈𝑑′ (𝑀 )) ≈ Λ(𝑀 ) + 𝐹𝑑′ ∣𝑀 .

CMCP is not an anti-repetition heuristic. It must retain the ability to become more certain when new mea-
surements arrive.

7.3 Commutation of independent mechanisms
If two innovations concern causally independent modules with disjoint effective supports,


                                         𝑈𝑖 𝑈𝑗 (𝑀 ) ≈ 𝑈𝑗 𝑈𝑖 (𝑀 ).

Order dependence is then confined to genuinely shared or misfactorized components. This contract is mea-
surable through commutators, curriculum reversals, and holonomy.

7.4 Coordinate equivariance
Let Φ be a smooth reparameterization with pushforward Φ∗ . The protocol should satisfy


                                      Φ∗ 𝑈 (𝑝, 𝑀 ) ≈ 𝑈 (Φ∗ 𝑝, Φ∗ 𝑀 ).

                                                     15
Natural gradients, metric projections, operator intertwiners, and trace-word fingerprints are used precisely
because they support this contract better than raw Euclidean parameter comparisons.

7.5 Path consistency
For two routes 𝛾1 and 𝛾2 transporting the same innovation from context 𝑐 to memory 𝑚,

                                          𝛾               𝛾
                                      ∥𝑇𝑚←𝑐
                                         1
                                            𝑧 − 𝑇𝑚←𝑐
                                                  2
                                                     𝑧∥𝑔 ≤ 𝜖path .
                                                                  𝑚


When curvature is nonzero, the residual cannot be driven to zero globally. The protocol should then expose
the holonomy budget, route through a designated shared subspace, or allocate context-specific adapters.

7.6 Write safety and provenance
Every protected write must be attributable to a context, a responsibility estimate, a novelty estimate, a geo-
metric match, and a lifecycle decision. Read permission does not imply write permission. Shared writes
must be reversible or versioned until consolidated.

7.7 Bounded interference
The system should maintain a budget on unintended cross-module curvature. A practical condition is


                                       ∑            ‖[𝐻𝑖 , 𝐻𝑗 ]‖2𝐹 ,𝑔 ≤ 𝐵shadow .
                                   (𝑖,𝑗)∉𝐸allowed


The allowed set contains explicitly shared mechanisms. The purpose is not to eliminate all overlap but to
localize it.


8. A Generic CMCP Algorithm
The following algorithm is intentionally agnostic about model class.
Inputs: context 𝑐, observation or transition 𝑥, high-level discrepancy 𝑒𝑐 , current shared memory ℳ𝑆 , local
memory ℳ𝐿 , write budget 𝐵.
Outputs: task action or prediction; local and provisional updates; zero or more audited shared-memory
commits.
1. Run the current computation. Read relevant shared and local modules and produce the output.
2. Encode credit. Factorize 𝑒𝑐 into candidate mechanism components 𝑧𝑐,𝑘 .
3. Construct local geometry. Estimate 𝜈𝑐 , one or more local information operators 𝐻𝑐,𝑎 , and score or
   sufficient-statistic features 𝑠𝑐 .
4. Retrieve candidates. Use semantic keys and the low-degree invariant fingerprint 𝜒𝐿 (H𝑐 ) to select a
   small candidate set of memories.
5. Align candidates. For each candidate 𝑀𝑗 , estimate 𝑇𝑗←𝑐 and an intertwining error 𝑞𝑗,𝑐 .
6. Estimate responsibility. Probe or predict the effect of intervening on 𝑀𝑗 ; compute 𝑟𝑗,𝑐 .
                                                          ⟂
7. Residualize evidence. Compute directional novelty 𝜈𝑗,𝑐    and conditional information 𝐹𝑐∣𝑀𝑗 .



                                                           16
 8. Classify the evidence. Select read-only reuse, shared update, local update, allocation, split, or drift
    branch.
 9. Route credit. Send only the approved innovation packet through the credit-only highway to selected
    modules.
10. Stage writes. Apply new shared evidence to a provisional buffer; update local adapters immediately
    within their own budget.
11. Validate. Test cross-context recurrence, intervention effects, path consistency, task benefit, and unin-
    tended commutators.
12. Commit or reject. Promote, merge, branch, freeze, reopen, or discard provisional state; append prove-
    nance.
13. Audit. Record evidence multiplicity, conditional-information gain, router precision, transport error, in-
    terference Gram, and retention outcomes.
 A compact pseudocode form is:
 CMCP-UPDATE(context c, discrepancy e, memory M):
     z              <- factorize_credit(e, c)
     (u, H, s)      <- local_geometry(c, z)
     candidates     <- retrieve(M, semantic_key(c), trace_fingerprint(H))

      packets <- []
      for memory item j in candidates:
          T, align_error <- estimate_transport(H, j.operator_tuple)
          responsibility <- intervention_score(j, c, z)
          dir_novelty    <- (I - projector(j.subspace)) T u
          score_resid, F_cond <- conditional_information(T s, j.ledger)
          packets.append(classify(j, dir_novelty, score_resid, F_cond,
                                  responsibility, align_error))

      selected <- sparse_budgeted_route(packets)
      apply_credit_only_updates(selected)
      stage_provisional_writes(selected)
      validate_against_interventions_paths_and_interference()
      commit_merge_branch_or_reject()
      update_provenance_and_audit_log()


 9. Scalable Approximation
 The full formulation uses operator tuples and information metrics, but dense second-order matrices are not
 required.

 9.1 Matrix-free operator access
 Hessian-vector and generalized Gauss-Newton-vector products can be computed through automatic differ-
 entiation without constructing a Hessian [12]. In other adaptive systems, equivalent products arise from
 linearized simulation, finite-difference perturbations, adjoint methods, or system-identification probes.
 A commutator action requires only nested products:



                                                      17
                                    [𝐻𝑖 , 𝐻𝑗 ]𝑣 = 𝐻𝑖 (𝐻𝑗 𝑣) − 𝐻𝑗 (𝐻𝑖 𝑣).

This is enough to estimate commutator norms, dominant interference planes, and route mismatch.

9.2 Stochastic traces and fingerprints
For a random probe 𝑧 with 𝔼[𝑧𝑧 ∗ ] = 𝐼 ,


                                              Tr(𝐴) = 𝔼[𝑧 ∗ 𝐴𝑧].

Hutchinson estimation therefore gives trace words, curriculum characters, commutator energies, and selected
moments using a modest number of operator rollouts [1], [2], [13]. The memory index can store noisy
confidence intervals rather than exact invariants.

9.3 Low-rank and structured metrics
Practical metrics may use diagonal, block-diagonal, Kronecker-factored, low-rank-plus-diagonal, or module-
local approximations. K-FAC is one established way to obtain tractable curvature blocks in neural networks
[14]. In control, balanced truncation or empirical controllability Gramians play a similar role. In probabilistic
models, sufficient-statistic Fisher blocks may be available analytically.
The protocol does not require the metric to be exact. It requires the approximation error to be exposed,
because a poor metric can create false mechanism matches or destroy path consistency.

9.4 Coarse-to-fine retrieval
A scalable system can use three stages.
1. Semantic or structural shortlist: retrieve by content, topology, tags, or context.
2. Low-degree geometric filter: compare trace, spectrum, overlap, and commutator sketches.
3. Local alignment test: optimize a low-rank intertwiner only for the few surviving candidates.
This avoids comparing every context with every memory item.

9.5 Learning the transport
Several approximations are possible:
• orthogonal Procrustes alignment between dominant information subspaces;
• canonical-correlation or principal-angle matching;
• learned partial isometries regularized by operator intertwining;
• transport predicted by a context encoder and corrected by local probes;
• graph or bundle connections learned jointly with module boundaries;
• sparse routing matrices constrained to preserve a local metric.
Transport confidence should decline near degenerate or highly symmetric operator tuples, where several
alignments are equally valid. Repeated identical modules are especially problematic because the memory
cannot reliably determine which copy owns a write. Deliberate small heterogeneity or detuning of modules
can break this symmetry and improve identification and portability [1].


                                                      18
9.6 Memory lifecycle and garbage collection
CMCP requires explicit operations beyond gradient descent:
• promote: provisional evidence becomes shared;
• merge: two records have equivalent geometry and nonconflicting provenance;
• split: one record has persistent multimodal geometry or contradictory intervention signatures;
• branch: a mechanism changes over time;
• freeze: information and intervention signatures stabilize;
• reopen: new conditional information exceeds a threshold;
• retire: a record is unused or superseded;
• quarantine: provenance, responsibility, or novelty is suspect.
These operations can be implemented through model selection, nonparametric allocation, expert routing,
program synthesis, or database transactions. The protocol specifies the evidential tests, not one data structure.


10. A Rank-One Diagnostic Example
Consider two rank-one information operators


                               𝐻𝑠 = 𝑎 𝑢𝑢∗ ,        𝐻𝑡 = 𝑏 𝑣𝑣∗ ,        𝜌 = 𝑢∗ 𝑣,

with unit vectors 𝑢, 𝑣. Two second-order statistics are

                                                  Tr(𝐻𝑠 𝐻𝑡 )
                                         𝑂𝑠𝑡 =                    = 𝜌2 ,
                                                 ‖𝐻𝑠 ‖𝐹 ‖𝐻𝑡 ‖𝐹

and

                                        ‖[𝐻𝑠 , 𝐻𝑡 ]‖2
                                                      = |𝜌|√1 − 𝜌2 .
                                            𝑎𝑏
They distinguish three geometric cases.
1. Parallel: |𝜌| = 1. The contexts use the same direction and commute. This may be a duplicate mani-
   festation or a new independent observation. Curvature cannot decide; the conditional-information ledger
   must.
2. Orthogonal: 𝜌 = 0. The contexts affect independent supports and commute. With correct routing, their
   updates should be modular.
3. Oblique: 0 < |𝜌| < 1. The contexts share a component but encode it differently. The commutator is
   nonzero and peaks at intermediate overlap. Transport or modular refactorization is required.
The example makes a central point: curvature is not a universal synonym for redundancy. Exact du-
plicate evidence in one fixed direction can be overcounted with zero commutator. Independent orthogonal
mechanisms also have zero commutator. The protocol needs the full combination of symmetric overlap,
conditional information, and antisymmetric path dependence [4].




                                                      19
Figure 3: Rank-one symmetric overlap and normalized commutator as a function of directional overlap. Curvature
vanishes for both parallel and orthogonal cases, so it must be combined with symmetric overlap and conditional evi-
dence accounting.


11. Diagnostics and Audit
CMCP should be evaluated as a protocol, not only through end-task performance. The following measure-
ments correspond directly to its contracts.

11.1 Evidence-ledger diagnostics
• Write amplification: number of shared-memory commits per ground-truth causal innovation.
• Duplicate idempotence error: change in memory after replaying an exact or deterministically derived
  manifestation.
• Independent-evidence utilization: information or performance gain from conditionally independent re-
  peated observations.
• Conditional-information ratio: Tr(𝐹𝑐∣𝑀 )/(Tr 𝐹𝑐𝑐 + 𝜖).
• Overcount and undercount: deviation of effective precision from a joint or batch reference ledger.
• Provenance coverage: fraction of protected writes with reconstructible source, responsibility, and novelty
  records.

11.2 Routing diagnostics
• precision and recall of selected modules against known intervention structure;
• causal effect of routed versus blocked updates;
• bandwidth and number of active highway routes;
• fraction of credit classified as shared, local, nuisance, new, or drift;
• delayed harm from false-positive shared writes.

11.3 Geometric diagnostics
• operator-tuple match error and transport condition number;
• path-consistency loss across alternative routes;

                                                       20
• pairwise commutator norms;
• interference Gram rank and off-diagonal structure;
• curriculum holonomy angle spectrum;
• symmetric convergence spectra and per-module precision growth.
Interference diagnostics have an important blind spot. A successfully modular system has commuting task
operators and therefore little holonomy data. A near-zero shadow cannot, by itself, validate the architecture;
it is also consistent with a broken probe or inactive learning. Convergence, information gain, intervention
response, and per-module curvature must be measured alongside the shadow [2].

11.4 System-level outcomes
• retention after sequential learning;
• forward transfer and negative transfer;
• adaptation speed under genuine mechanism drift;
• calibration of uncertainty or confidence;
• robustness to adversarial duplicate records and memory poisoning;
• capacity growth, module reuse, and garbage-collection quality;
• curriculum-order sensitivity outside designated shared modules.


12. Broad Application Patterns
CMCP is intended as a protocol layer that can sit above many learning rules.

                      Persistent causal                             Information
Domain                memory                 Credit token           geometry              Typical local state
Continual             Shared feature,        Loss gradient,         Fisher, GGN, task     Adapter, task head,
supervised            expert, or             prediction residual,   Hessian               episodic buffer
learning              mechanism              constraint signal
                      modules
Predictive coding     Stable generative      Local                  Energy Hessian,       Latent state, local
and energy models     transitions            prediction-error or    Fisher,               transition
                                             distributional         error-coordinate      parameters
                                             residual               metric
Reinforcement         Dynamics factors,      TD innovation,         Policy Fisher,        Episode memory,
learning              skills, options,       advantage,             successor features, context policy,
                      reward                 model-prediction       transition Jacobian eligibility trace
                      mechanisms             error                  Gram
World models and      Object dynamics,       Counterfactual                               Task controller,
                                                                    Controllability/observability
robotics              contact laws,          prediction error,      Gramians,             regime adapter
                      sensor models          control residual       Gauss-Newton
Federated and         Cross-site             Site-local gradient    Site                  Private site adapter
multi-domain          invariant              or                     Fisher/operator       and provenance
learning              mechanisms             sufficient-statistic   tuple                 ledger
                                             increment
Scientific model      Reusable laws,         Posterior score,       Fisher information,   Dataset-specific
revision              submodels, latent      residual, failed       sensitivity Hessian   nuisance model or
                      mechanisms             prediction                                   hypothesis branch

                                                      21
                      Persistent causal                            Information
Domain                memory                  Credit token         geometry               Typical local state
Autonomous            Skills, tools, rules,   Critique, failed     Jacobian/Hessian       Conversation,
agents                semantic and            plan, tool error,    of outcome             episode, user, or
                      episodic memory         reward signal        sensitivity            tool-local memory
Distributed           Canonical causal        New record,          Conditional            Source-specific
databases and         event or entity         contradiction,       covariance and         record, quarantine,
knowledge             records                 update proposal      dependency             version branch
systems                                                            operator


12.1 Continual learning
Regularization methods such as elastic weight consolidation and synaptic intelligence protect directions
judged important to prior tasks [15], [16]. Gradient projection methods constrain new updates against
episodic memories [17]. Progressive and modular systems isolate parameters or add new capacity [18],
[19]. CMCP is complementary. It asks whether several tasks concern the same underlying mechanism,
whether their evidence is new, how their coordinates should be aligned, and whether shared or local storage
is warranted.

12.2 Reinforcement learning and world models
A scalar TD error mixes many causal sources: transition surprise, reward-model error, policy mismatch,
state aliasing, and stochasticity [20], [21]. CMCP would factorize the innovation, route model error to the
responsible dynamics component, route policy error to the responsible skill or option, and use conditional
information to avoid repeatedly consolidating the same trajectory. Persistent memory can store environment
mechanisms, while local state stores episode- or regime-specific adaptations.

12.3 Control and robotics
Controllers often reuse physical mechanisms across tasks while encountering changing payloads, contacts,
sensors, or environments. A local sensitivity or controllability geometry can match mechanisms across robot
configurations. A credit-only highway can update the responsible dynamics or calibration module without
adding a permanent shortcut to the control law. Drift branching is especially important: a changed actuator
should create a versioned mechanism rather than silently corrupt the nominal model.

12.4 Federated and multi-domain systems
Federated learning needs to distinguish globally shared structure from site-specific effects. Raw gradient
aggregation can overcount correlated populations or erase minority regimes. CMCP can treat each site update
as an evidence packet, use operator fingerprints to identify shared mechanisms, residualize against the global
ledger, and keep local residuals private. Trace and operator sketches may be easier to communicate than raw
data, although privacy leakage from second-order statistics requires separate protection.

12.5 Scientific model updating
Scientific evidence often enters through pipelines that derive many observables from the same experiment.
Treating each derived record as independent can create false confidence. CMCP’s conditional-information


                                                      22
 ledger offers a local way to discount predictable descendants while retaining independent replication. Geo-
 metric fingerprints can identify when different experimental regimes constrain the same mechanism in dif-
 ferent coordinates. Intervention responsibility corresponds to experimental manipulation or credible natural
 experiments.

 12.6 Autonomous agents and long-term memory
 Memory-augmented agents frequently use semantic similarity for retrieval and heuristics for consolidation.
 CMCP adds a distinction between semantic resemblance and evidential novelty. A retrieved rule may be
 useful in many episodes without being rewritten after each use. A failed action can generate credit to the
 responsible skill, tool model, or user-specific adapter. Promotion to global memory requires recurrence
 across contexts and intervention-consistent benefit.


 13. Experimental Program
 A credible evaluation should begin in synthetic environments with known causal structure, then move to
 realistic domains.

 13.1 Synthetic causal benchmark
 Construct a structural causal system with known mechanisms and parameter supports. Generate contexts
 that separately instantiate:
 1. an exact duplicate manifestation of one innovation;
 2. a deterministic descendant of stored evidence;
 3. an independent repeated measurement of the same mechanism;
 4. the same mechanism expressed through a rotated representation;
 5. independent mechanisms on orthogonal supports;
 6. a context-local exception;
 7. a genuinely new mechanism;
 8. gradual mechanism drift;
 9. abrupt regime change;
10. nuisance correlation with no intervention effect;
11. adversarial attempts to trigger shared writes.
 The benchmark should provide ground truth for mechanism identity, causal responsibility, evidence depen-
 dence, and drift.

 13.2 Factorial ablations
 Compare at least:
 1. local learning without shared memory or highways;
 2. shared memory with ordinary global gradients;
 3. a raw full-error highway without a ledger;
 4. a causally routed highway without persistent memory;
 5. persistent memory with semantic matching but no information geometry;
 6. CMCP without conditional information, using only subspace projection;
 7. CMCP without intervention-sensitive responsibility;


                                                     23
8. full CMCP.
These ablations isolate the contribution of reach, memory, geometry, causal routing, and evidence account-
ing.

13.3 Core predictions
• A full-error highway improves adaptation speed but broadens cross-task interference.
• Memory without a highway reduces duplicate writes but leaves difficult long-range credit problems.
• A causal highway without persistent memory lacks a stable reference for novelty and repeatedly rediscov-
  ers what is already known.
• Subspace projection alone suppresses legitimate independent repeated evidence.
• Conditional-information residualization preserves independent evidence while suppressing deterministic
  duplicates and correlated descendants.
• Operator alignment reduces false mechanism splits under rotated representations.
• Full CMCP yields low write amplification, high router precision, localized interference, better retention,
  and faster adaptation to true novelty.
• Under successful modularization, holonomy diagnostics approach zero while symmetric information gain
  and intervention response remain nonzero.

13.4 Stress tests
The protocol should be stressed under:
• poor curvature approximations;
• highly symmetric interchangeable modules;
• nonstationary metrics;
• delayed or sparse intervention feedback;
• conflicting provenance;
• capacity limits;
• long loops far from a local quadratic regime;
• partially observed causes;
• strategic agents that manipulate the write gate.
A negative result should identify which contract failed. For example, high write amplification with low path
error points to a conditional-information failure, while order sensitivity with correct multiplicity points to a
transport or modularity failure.


14. Relationship to Existing Approaches
CMCP is not a replacement for standard learning algorithms. It is a protocol for deciding where and how
their updates become persistent knowledge.

14.1 Natural gradient and curvature-aware optimization
Natural gradient makes a local update invariant to smooth reparameterization and corrects metric anisotropy
[9]. K-FAC and related approximations make this practical [14]. CMCP uses the same geometry for mech-
anism matching, transport, and evidence units. Natural gradient answers how to measure and scale a local



                                                      24
update. CMCP additionally asks whether the update is new, which memory owns it, and whether it should
be shared.

14.2 Regularization, replay, and projection
EWC, synaptic intelligence, replay, GEM, and related methods preserve prior performance by penalizing or
projecting updates [15], [16], [17], [22]. They mainly control displacement in important directions. CMCP
adds a causal evidence ledger and a mechanism identity layer. It can use replay or projection as a local
realization of a write decision, but it seeks to prevent redundant evidence from entering the protected state
in the first place.

14.3 Modular networks and mixture-of-experts
Mixture-of-experts and progressive architectures allocate specialized capacity and sparse routing [18], [23],
[24]. CMCP supplies criteria for deciding when two experts should share a mechanism, when a residual
should remain local, when modules should merge or split, and when replicated experts are too symmetric to
identify reliably.

14.4 Causal representation learning
Causal representation learning seeks variables and modules aligned with autonomous mechanisms [25], [26].
CMCP assumes that such alignment may be partial and uses interventions plus geometric matching to im-
prove it online. It is closer to a protocol for maintaining and updating causal representations than to a theorem
that discovers them from observational data alone.

14.5 Predictive coding, local learning, and feedback channels
Predictive coding and local energy-based learning provide biologically and computationally attractive local
discrepancy signals [27], [28]. Their long-range credit can be limited by local self-adjoint inference geometry
[3]. Direct feedback and error highways provide reach [8]. CMCP combines direct credit reach with causal
factorization, novelty filtering, and metric-aware transport so that the solution to credit starvation does not
become diffuse entanglement.

14.6 Bayesian filtering and sufficient-statistic accumulation
Bayesian filtering and Kalman-style updates already separate prior state from new evidence [29]. CMCP
generalizes the idea to modular, context-dependent systems where the main challenge is deciding whether
an observation addresses the same mechanism, how to transport it into a common frame, and whether it
is conditionally new. In exponential-family cases, the memory ledger can be implemented directly through
natural parameters and sufficient statistics. In non-Bayesian systems, the same structure can govern gradients,
constraints, or program revisions.


15. Limitations and Open Problems
15.1 Second-order geometry is local
Two mechanisms can agree to second order at an operating point and differ at higher order. Strongly nonlinear
or far-from-equilibrium learning may require third-derivative tensors, higher jets, nonlinear transport, or


                                                      25
direct comparison of finite update maps. A natural extension is a hierarchy of operator-and-tensor signatures
rather than a single Hessian tuple [1].

15.2 Geometry does not establish causal direction by itself
Operator overlap and curvature identify shared sensitivity structure. They do not prove that a module is an
upstream cause rather than a correlated proxy. Intervention, randomized perturbation, environment variation,
or a trusted structural model remains necessary. In domains where interventions are impossible, causal
responsibility will be uncertain and writes should remain provisional.

15.3 Conditional Fisher information is an approximation
The Schur-complement rule captures linear conditional predictability of score statistics. Nonlinear redun-
dancy can remain. Exact conditional mutual information is more general but harder to estimate. Memory
summaries can also lose dependence information, causing false novelty. The protocol should report the
resolution and confidence of its ledger.

15.4 Symmetry and identifiability
Interchangeable modules produce multiple equally valid transports. This can cause write races, unstable
ownership, and poor portability certificates. Detuning, explicit addresses, provenance, or a symmetry-aware
quotient representation may be necessary.

15.5 Memory ossification and concept drift
A stable read-many/write-gated core can become too difficult to revise. Thresholds should depend on evi-
dence volume, mechanism age, drift indicators, and the cost of false consolidation. Versioning and reversible
provisional writes are essential.

15.6 Router self-confirmation
A module that already receives credit may appear increasingly responsible because it changes the output.
Controlled randomized probes and held-out intervention tests are needed to prevent this feedback loop.

15.7 Computational and privacy cost
Second-order sketches, intervention probes, and provenance logs consume compute and storage. In feder-
ated or privacy-sensitive settings, Fisher and gradient sketches may leak information. Secure aggregation,
differential privacy, or local audit mechanisms must be integrated separately.

15.8 The protocol may discover useful mechanisms that are not ontologically causal
A module can be intervention-useful and stable without corresponding to a unique real-world causal vari-
able. CMCP’s operational criterion is enough for credit and memory management, but stronger scientific
interpretation requires external validation.




                                                     26
16. Conclusion
The Causal Memory and Credit Protocol is a proposal for turning adaptive learning into disciplined evidence
assimilation. Its central architectural idea is simple:
      Represent a shared mechanism once, let many contexts read it, allow only causally responsible
      and conditionally novel evidence to modify it, and transport that evidence through a sparse credit
      channel that respects local information geometry.
Persistent memory and a causal credit-only highway are complementary. The memory gives the highway a
stable answer to what is already known. The highway gives the memory a selective answer to which distant
mechanism should be allowed to change. Information geometry supplies the language for recognizing the
same mechanism across representations, learning transport maps, and auditing path dependence. Conditional
information supplies the missing distinction between redundant manifestations and independent repeated
evidence.
The protocol therefore separates four operations that ordinary learning often conflates:
1. computational reuse of a mechanism;
2. causal assignment of a discrepancy;
3. geometric transport of credit;
4. statistical assimilation of innovation.
This separation is broader than any particular neural or Bayesian implementation. It applies wherever a
system learns sequentially, shares mechanisms across contexts, and risks either starving distant modules of
credit or rewriting shared state with diffuse and redundant evidence. The decisive empirical question is not
whether CMCP can produce another accuracy gain. It is whether it can achieve the protocol contracts: idem-
potence for duplicate manifestations, accumulation for independent evidence, commutation for independent
mechanisms, coordinate-equivariant matching, bounded path inconsistency, sparse responsible writes, and
robust adaptation to genuine novelty.


References
[1]    B. Goertzel, “Transfer rigidity of the forgetting holonomy spectrum: A second-order TransWeave
       theorem,” Working note, 2026.
[2]    B. Goertzel, “The shadow calculus: Which curriculum interference is observable?” Working note,
       version 1.0, 2026.
[3]    B. Goertzel and Claude-Fable, “The coupling dilemma: Reach versus conditioning, sharing versus
       forgetting, and catastrophic forgetting as curvature of the task manifold,” Working draft, 2026.
[4]    B. Goertzel, “Causal evidence accounting in continual learning: Metric anisotropy, evidence double
       counting, and task-manifold curvature,” Working note, 2026.
[5]    B. Goertzel, “Causally designed error highways: Long-range credit transport without diffuse task
       entanglement,” Working note, 2026.
[6]    S. Demko, W. F. Moss, and P. W. Smith, “Decay rates for inverses of band matrices,” Mathematics
       of Computation, vol. 43, no. 168, pp. 491–499, 1984.
[7]    M. Benzi and G. H. Golub, “Bounds for the entries of matrix functions with applications to precon-
       ditioning,” BIT Numerical Mathematics, vol. 39, pp. 417–438, 1999.
[8]    A. Nokland, “Direct feedback alignment provides learning in deep neural networks,” in Advances in
       neural information processing systems, 2016.


                                                     27
[9]    S. Amari, “Natural gradient works efficiently in learning,” Neural Computation, vol. 10, no. 2, pp.
       251–276, 1998.
[10]   S. Amari and H. Nagaoka, Methods of information geometry. American Mathematical Society; Ox-
       ford University Press, 2000.
[11]   N. N. Chentsov, Statistical decision rules and optimal inference. American Mathematical Society,
       1982.
[12]   B. A. Pearlmutter, “Fast exact multiplication by the hessian,” Neural Computation, vol. 6, no. 1, pp.
       147–160, 1994.
[13]   M. F. Hutchinson, “A stochastic estimator of the trace of the influence matrix for laplacian smoothing
       splines,” Communications in Statistics - Simulation and Computation, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1059–1076,
       1989.
[14]   J. Martens and R. Grosse, “Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-factored approximate curva-
       ture,” in Proceedings of the 32nd international conference on machine learning, 2015, pp. 2408–
       2417.
[15]   J. Kirkpatrick et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks,” in Proceedings of the
       national academy of sciences, 2017, pp. 3521–3526.
[16]   F. Zenke, B. Poole, and S. Ganguli, “Continual learning through synaptic intelligence,” Proceedings
       of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3987–3995, 2017.
[17]   D. Lopez-Paz and M. Ranzato, “Gradient episodic memory for continual learning,” in Advances in
       neural information processing systems, 2017.
[18]   A. A. Rusu et al., “Progressive neural networks,” in arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04671, 2016.
[19]   J. Schwarz et al., “Progress & compress: A scalable framework for continual learning,” in Proceed-
       ings of the 35th international conference on machine learning, 2018, pp. 4528–4537.
[20]   R. S. Sutton, “Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences,” Machine Learning, vol.
       3, pp. 9–44, 1988.
[21]   R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction, 2nd ed. MIT Press, 2018.
[22]   A. Chaudhry, M. Ranzato, M. Rohrbach, and M. Elhoseiny, “Continual learning with tiny episodic
       memories,” in Workshop on multi-task and lifelong reinforcement learning, ICML, 2019.
[23]   R. A. Jacobs, M. I. Jordan, S. J. Nowlan, and G. E. Hinton, “Adaptive mixtures of local experts,”
       Neural Computation, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 79–87, 1991.
[24]   N. Shazeer et al., “Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer,”
       in International conference on learning representations, 2017.
[25]   B. Sch”olkopf et al., “Toward causal representation learning,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 109, no.
       5, pp. 612–634, 2021.
[26]   Y. Bengio et al., “A meta-transfer objective for learning to disentangle causal mechanisms,” arXiv
       preprint arXiv:1901.10912, 2019.
[27]   R. P. N. Rao and D. H. Ballard, “Predictive coding in the visual cortex: A functional interpretation of
       some extra-classical receptive-field effects,” Nature Neuroscience, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 79–87, 1999.
[28]   K. Friston, “The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory?” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol.
       11, no. 2, pp. 127–138, 2010.
[29]   R. E. Kalman, “A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems,” Journal of Basic Engi-
       neering, vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 35–45, 1960.




                                                     28
