                            Causal Coding
          and the General Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem
                                              Ben Goertzel

                                           December 1, 2025


                                                Abstract
         We present a general framework in which continual learning robustness is a structural con-
     sequence of learning and using correct (or approximately correct) causal structure. The key
     idea is that when an AI system factors its world-model into causally meaningful modules, and
     allocates its computational budget so as to keep those modules as independent as the data al-
     low, then the gradient flows associated with different contexts almost commute. In that regime,
     training under a stream of changing contexts is provably close to training on a joint mixture,
     and catastrophic forgetting is quantitatively controlled, with explicit error terms that depend
     on the amount of inter-context overlap.
         We formalize this as a General Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem in an abstract operator
     setting, and then give two concrete specializations: (i) a continuous-variable version on smooth
     parameter manifolds using gradient flows and Lie brackets; and (ii) a discrete version for general
     state/update systems. Both are instances of a more general category-theoretic formulation in
     which context-conditioned updates are endomorphisms on a causally factorized object, and
     “small commutators” are measured in an enriching quantale of loss and computational cost.
         Finally, we specialize the theorem to (a) causal-coding versions of predictive-coding neural
     networks, where interventional Jacobians and clarity regularizers suppress cross-module Hessian
     blocks, and (b) predictive coding Transformers, where causal coding acts at the level of attention
     heads and value channels. In both cases we obtain explicit qualitative and quantitative condi-
     tions under which causal coding makes catastrophic forgetting provably hard to achieve, in a
     probably approximately correct sense that degrades smoothly as causal modularity assumptions
     are relaxed.


Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                            3

2 Background                                                                                              5
  2.1 The independence-coupling tradeoff and weakness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             5
  2.2 Predictive coding and causal coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           5
  2.3 PC Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         6
  2.4 Continual learning and commutativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            7

3 The General Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem                                                    7
  3.1 Abstract setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
  3.2 From causal modularity to small commutators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
  3.3 Sequential vs. joint training under small commutators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
  3.4 The General Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10


                                                     1
   3.5   Informal interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   3.6   Making the theorem PAC for closer correlation to reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

4 Continuous-variable specialization                                                              12
  4.1 Continuous parameter manifolds and gradient flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
  4.2 Explicit Lie-bracket bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

5 Discrete-variable specialization                                                                    13
  5.1 Abstract endomorphisms and commutators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            13
  5.2 Discrete causal modularity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    13
  5.3 Discrete Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          14
  5.4 Categorical viewpoint (very briefly) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    14

6 Application to causal-coding neural networks                                                        14
  6.1 Parameter modularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      15
  6.2 Causal gates and clarity as enforcers of modularity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
  6.3 Resulting continual-learning guarantees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15

7 Application to PC Transformers                                                                      16
  7.1 Modularization in a Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16
  7.2 Causal coding at the head/channel level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16
  7.3 Causal modularity and commutators for Transformer contexts . . . . . . . . . . . . .            17

8 Application to incremental compression as a learning approach                                   17
  8.1 Incremental-compression-style causal coding and continual learning . . . . . . . . . . 18
  8.2 Contexts, feature libraries, and modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
  8.3 An incremental-causal update rule for a new context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
  8.4 Structural assumptions for multi-context incremental compressibility . . . . . . . . . 21
  8.5 Incremental-Compression Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
  8.6 Categorical viewpoint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
  8.7 One more step: McBride-inspired gradient guidance for causal incremental compression 23

A A categorical formulation of causal continual learning                                              27
  A.1 Three layers of description as categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
  A.2 Contexts as endomorphisms and continual learning as path-independence . . . . . .               27
  A.3 Causal factorization as monoidal structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      28
  A.4 Context-locality as factorwise endomorphisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        29
  A.5 Categorical General Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             30
  A.6 Connection to the tradeoff between preprocessing and disentangling . . . . . . . . .            30
  A.7 Approximate categorical CCL: enriched setting and confusing pairs . . . . . . . . . .           31
      A.7.1 Metric-enriched monoidal setting and approximate locality . . . . . . . . . .             31
      A.7.2 Pairwise commutator defects and confusing pairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           32
      A.7.3 Approximate CCL with linear dependence on confusing pairs . . . . . . . . .               33
      A.7.4 Connection to causal-coding neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           34
      A.7.5 Connection to incremental compression and IC-based causal coding . . . . .                35




                                                   2
B Illustrative example: causal coding in a PC Transformer with overlapping tex-
  tual contexts                                                                                   35
  B.1 Two fuzzy, overlapping contexts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
  B.2 Context-conditioned do-influence at the head/channel level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
  B.3 Overlapping contexts and approximate modularity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
  B.4 Why this does not require discrete context labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

C Asymptotic equivalence and acceleration of causal IC                                             39


1     Introduction
The aim of this paper is to give a simple, clear and practical explanation for why

    • causal coding, considered as a general family of learning mechanisms for guiding learning-
      networks toward internal structure reflecting causal relations in the world (spanning e.g. both
      continuous and discrete systems, and neural and non-neural systems)

can be generally effective for

    • continual learning (avoiding pathologies like “catastrophic forgetting” that one sees in
      typical backpropagation-based neural nets)

     The high-level story is simple. Any reasonably general learner sees many contexts over its
lifetime: different input regimes, goals, interaction patterns, or parts of the world. If adapting
to a new context always re-writes the same small set of entangled parameters, then the system
must forget: new updates tear up old solutions. If, instead, the system carves its internal state
into reasonably independent causal modules, so that each context mostly tunes its own subset of
modules while leaving the rest alone, then adapting to new contexts does not destroy competence
in older ones.
     The central claim of this paper is that:

       Causal modeling, combined with an explicit drive to keep latent factors as independent
       as the data allow, is exactly what you need to make this modularity happen—and to
       make continual learning work.

    More concretely, the argument has four conceptual steps:

    1. Contexts correspond to different ways of querying the same causal world. If there
       really is a shared causal structure underlying all the contexts an agent encounters, then there
       is a distinguished representation in which that structure becomes a relatively sparse graph
       over latent variables, with many weak or absent edges. Different contexts then depend on
       different subgraphs.

    2. Independence vs. dependency is not optional: it is an optimization tradeoff. A
       system can either (1) explicitly track dependencies (couplings, interactions, attention links),
       or (2) reparametrize its state to make things more independent (whitening, disentangling,
       abstraction). Both routes cost compute; the “tradeoff theorem” says you cannot hit a fixed
       accuracy target without investing in at least one of them. If you optimize this tradeoff, you
       end up with representations that are as factorized as the data permit.


                                                  3
  3. When the representation is factorized, context updates almost commute. Each
     context induces a vector field in parameter space (its gradient field under the context-specific
     loss). If different contexts touch almost-disjoint modules, their vector fields almost commute
     in the Lie bracket sense. When flows commute, doing context A then B is almost the same as
     doing B then A, and almost the same as doing a single step on the combined loss over both
     contexts. When contexts overlap, commutators are controlled by the size and strength of the
     overlaps, as made explicit in the abstract categorical formulation and its “confusing pairs”
     bounds.
  4. When context flows almost commute, forgetting is bounded. General results on
     compositions of flows show that the deviation between sequential training under contexts
     1, . . . , T and a joint multi-context update is controlled by the pairwise commutators. If those
     commutators are small, the performance drop in earlier contexts after adapting to new ones is
     provably small, and the error grows at most linearly with the number of genuinely interacting
     context pairs.

    The role of causal coding is to operationalize steps (1) and (2) in predictive-coding style net-
works. Causal coding uses interventional influence (do-derivatives) to decide which connections
really carry causal signal, gates updates through those connections, and prunes redundant routes
that mainly serve to diffuse influence. Together with the general independence/coupling tradeoff,
this pushes the network toward a causally-meaningful, weakly entangled latent factorization. Once
you have that, the commutator and continual-learning results kick in.
    Very roughly, the philosophical moral is:

     To do continual learning well, an AI should treat new contexts as local updates to a
     causal world-model that it already factorized as much as possible. Causal coding is one
     way—and perhaps a particularly clean way—to enforce this factorization and make the
     underlying gradient flows nearly commuting.

What this paper does. On the technical side we:

   • Formalize an abstract setting in which a family of contexts corresponds to a family of update
     operators on a state/configuration space equipped with a causal factorization.
   • State and prove a General Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem that says: if context-conditioned
     updates respect this causal factorization in a precise sense (only touching the modules that
     causally matter to them, plus small residual couplings), then their update operators almost
     commute, and sequential training almost matches joint multi-context training, up to error
     terms that depend explicitly on a sparse graph of “confusing” context pairs.
   • Give two concrete specializations:
       1. a continuous-variable version on a smooth parameter manifold, with context updates
          given by gradient flows and “almost commute” measured by Lie brackets of vector fields;
       2. a discrete-variable version where the state space is arbitrary and context-conditioned
          updates are arbitrary endomorphisms, with “almost commute” measured in a metric or
          quantale-enriched sense.
   • Show how the continuous version applies to causal-coding predictive-coding networks, where
     do-influence matrices and clarity regularizers suppress cross-module Hessian blocks and thus
     shrink commutators.

                                                 4
    • Sketch how the same structure appears in predictive-coding Transformers, where causal coding
      acts across attention heads and feed-forward channels.

Paper structure. Section 2 reviews the independence/coupling tradeoff, predictive and causal
coding, PC Transformers, and the commutativity-based view of continual learning. Section 3 states
and proves the general Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem and gives a nontechnical interpretation.
Sections 4 and 5 give continuous and discrete specializations. Sections 6 and 7 apply the theorem to
causal-coding neural networks and then to PC Transformers specifically, followed by Section 8 which
considers application to incremental compression (as an example of a purely discrete, non-neural
application).
    Appendix A gives a general categorical formulation of the Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem,
and Appendix B gives some hypothetical in-depth examples of the application to transformers.
Appendix C clarifies some aspects of the application to incremental compression—noting that
in a best-case regime where a modular optimum exists, the use of causal coding can accelerate
convergence toward this optimum without changing it; and in more typical regimes it biases learning
toward different, more modular optima that may be preferable for continual learning even if they
differ from the plain incremental-compression optimum.


2     Background
2.1    The independence-coupling tradeoff and weakness
Any system that processes multiple information channels faces an irreducible choice:

    • Route A: independence-enforcing transforms. Change representation to make channels more
      independent (whitening, decorrelation, factorization, abstraction, masking). This reduces the
      amount of explicit dependency you need to track later but costs computation now.

    • Route B: explicit dependency modeling. Keep the representation as-is, but introduce explicit
      couplings (factors, attention, joins, multi-ary operations) that track dependencies. This can
      explode in cost as higher-order interactions are added.

    The “tradeoff theorem” (in its various analytic and categorical forms) says that, subject to
resource constraints, any method that hits a given information-efficiency target must pay at least
one of these costs. More refined statements characterize Pareto-optimal operating points as those
where the marginal information gain per unit cost is equalized between Route A and Route B.
Practically, this implies that a well-designed system will:

    1. perform just enough independence-inducing transforms to keep the remaining dependency
       mass manageable; and

    2. introduce explicit couplings only where the residual dependencies really matter for predictive
       accuracy.

This is the formal backbone behind the intuitive statement that “good architectures are as factorized
as the data allow.”




                                                  5
2.2   Predictive coding and causal coding
Predictive coding (PC) treats a network as implementing inference in a hierarchical generative
model. Each layer predicts the activity of the layer below; prediction errors are driven to zero by
iterative updates of latent variables; weights are updated by local Hebbian-style rules driven by
prediction errors. In the standard formulation, the key quantities are

   • a free energy F (x, z; θ), often quadratic in residuals;

   • inference dynamics ż = −∂F/∂z relaxing to a fixed point;

   • learning rules ∆θ ∝ ∂F/∂θ using local error and presynaptic activity.

   Causal coding (CC) modifies this picture in two crucial ways:

  1. Causal gates. Instead of weighting updates by mere correlation, CC estimates do-influence
     matrices C, which quantify how much a child’s equilibrium would change under a small
     Pearlian intervention on a parent unit. Learning updates are then gated by |Cji |p (with
     p ∈ [1, 2]), focusing learning on connections that actually carry causal signal.

  2. Clarity / pruning. CC penalizes redundant or diffusive routes, for example via diffusion-
     based penalties on lateral connections and sparsity-inducing gates on vertical connections.
     This encourages direct, clear causal paths and prunes edges whose influence can already be
     explained by multi-hop paths through other units.

    Mathematically, do-influence can be expressed in terms of second derivatives of the free energy,
or approximated via natural-gradient / Fisher-metric surrogates. In multilayer hierarchies, block
Schur complements and Gauss-Newton approximations give tractable formulas for interventional
maps from one layer to another.
    The net effect is that CC drives the network toward a representation in which:

   • causal influence flows along a relatively sparse backbone of strong edges;

   • many potential paths exist but are weak or pruned;

   • the effective mixed Hessian blocks between causally unrelated groups of parameters are small.

2.3   PC Transformers
Recent work has shown how to implement Transformers in a predictive-coding framework: self-
attention, feed-forward layers, and normalization are treated as parts of a generative model; infer-
ence iteratively relaxes “value” nodes to minimize a KL-based free energy, and learning updates
weights accordingly. The key take-away for our purposes is that:

   • attention heads, value channels, and feed-forward blocks provide natural modules that could,
     in principle, be treated as approximately independent causal factors most of the time, with
     explicit couplings only where attention actually needs to connect tokens;

   • predictive coding already introduces local error signals and recurrent inference that make it
     natural to implement causal gates and pruning at the head/channel level.

   A “causal-codingified” PC Transformer would thus:


                                                  6
    • estimate interventional influence from heads/channels in layer ` + 1 to activities in layer `;
    • gate updates to attention and feed-forward weights by these influence estimates;
    • prune attention links and value channels that are redundant with others, using e.g. diffusion-
      style clarity penalties or sparse regression.
Section 7 returns to this in more detail.

2.4    Continual learning and commutativity
In continual learning, we are given a non-stationary stream of data in which the underlying distri-
bution and objectives drift over time. We refer to the different regimes of this stream as contexts:
different domains, goals, user populations, interaction styles, or environmental conditions. Catas-
trophic forgetting occurs when adapting to later contexts significantly degrades performance in
earlier ones.
    A useful way to analyze this is to view each context t as inducing a gradient vector field
Xt (θ) = −∇Lt (θ) on parameter space, where Lt is the loss under context t (e.g. an expectation
over data from that context). Training for a small time ht under context t is then approximated by
the time-ht flow Ψtht of Xt . A single pass over a sequence of contexts corresponds to the composition

                                 Θseq = ΨThT ◦ · · · ◦ Ψ2h2 ◦ Ψ1h1 (θ0 ).
                                                                     P
The “ideal” joint step, training on a weighted
                                       P         mixture LΣ = t ht Lt , corresponds to the time-1
flow of the combined vector field XΣ = t ht Xt :
                                            Θjoint = ΨΣ
                                                      1 (θ0 ).

   General results on compositions of flows show that the difference between Θseq and Θjoint is
governed by the pairwise commutators (Lie brackets) [Xi , Xj ]. Intuitively:
                            [Xi , Xj ](θ) = DXj (θ)Xi (θ) − DXi (θ)Xj (θ)
measures how much doing a tiny step of Xi then Xj differs from doing them in the opposite
order. When all [Xi , Xj ] vanish, the flows commute and order does not matter. When [Xi , Xj ] are
small, the order-dependence and hence the forgetting induced by a new context are quantitatively
bounded.
   For gradient flows, the commutator can be expressed in terms of mixed Hessian blocks, so that
small cross-block Hessians (and/or small gradients) imply small commutators. This is where causal
coding enters: by suppressing cross-module couplings, it shrinks the mixed blocks and thus reduces
commutators across contexts. As we will see later via the categorical approximate CCL theorem,
these effects can be quantified in terms of a sparse graph of “confusing” context pairs and do not
require exact modularity.


3     The General Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem
We now formulate an abstract version of the main theorem, with as few architecture-specific as-
sumptions as possible. This section uses a continuous notation (vector fields, gradients) but is
really about the structure of context-conditioned updates; Section 5 gives a purely discrete version,
and Appendix A gives a more general categorical version that subsumes both the continuous and
discrete cases among other potential variations, and also provides approximate variants whose error
bounds depend explicitly on context overlaps.

                                                    7
3.1    Abstract setup
Let Θ be a smooth parameter manifold (or simply Rd ). A context t is represented at the learning
level by a smooth loss Lt : Θ → R with associated gradient vector field Xt (θ) = −∇Lt (θ). We
assume each Lt has Lipschitz gradient and (optionally) satisfies a Polyak-Lojasiewicz condition in
the region of interest, so that gradient descent behaves well.
    We suppose the learner has chosen a causal representation and modularization of parameters:
                                                                    X
                          θ = (θ(1) , . . . , θ(M ) ), θ(m) ∈ Rdm ,   dm = d,
                                                                       m

intended to correspond to causal modules (latent factors, heads, channels, blocks, etc.). Informally,
a given context t should depend strongly only on the subset of modules that causally matter for
that context.

Definition 1 (Support sets and residual couplings). For each context t we define:

   • a support set St ⊆ {1, . . . , M } of modules that t claims to depend on;

   • a residual gradient outside support
                                                         X     ∂Lt
                                          Gout
                                           t (θ) :=                 (θ) ;
                                                              ∂θ(m)
                                                      m∈S
                                                       / t


   • cross-Hessian norms between modules m ∈ St and n ∈
                                                      / St ,

                                          cross              ∂ 2 Lt
                                         Ht,m,n (θ) :=                (θ) .
                                                          ∂θ(m) ∂θ(n)

We say that the family {Lt } is (εg , εh )-causally modular (relative to the modularization) if, in the
training region,
                                 Gout
                                    t (θ) ≤ εg ,
                                                       cross
                                                      Ht,m,n (θ) ≤ εh
for all t, all θ, all m ∈ St , and all n ∈
                                         / St .

   Intuitively: each context’s gradient lives almost entirely inside its support modules, and the
curvature coupling its support modules to others is small. This definition controls the “outside-
support” and cross-support terms; in the presence of overlapping supports, there are also in-support
terms that need to be bounded separately in terms of a pairwise overlap or confusion score, as made
explicit in the approximate categorical formalism in Appendix A.
   In a causal-coding network, the support sets St and small residuals are enforced by causal gates
and pruning:

   • gates suppress updates on parameters whose do-influence under that context is tiny;

   • clarity penalties prune edges that merely create redundant diffusive paths, shrinking cross-
     Hessian blocks.




                                                      8
3.2   From causal modularity to small commutators
Define the gradient vector fields
                                                                                     
                                                              ∂Lt              ∂Lt
                            Xt (θ) = −∇Lt (θ) = −                (1)
                                                                     , . . . , (M )       .
                                                              ∂θ              ∂θ

The Lie bracket [Xi , Xj ] can be expressed in components as
                                                                                 !
                                                 X     ∂Xjk ` ∂Xik `
                             [Xi , Xj ]k (θ) =             X −    X                   ,
                                                       ∂θ` i   ∂θ` j
                                                 `

where k, ` range over coordinates on Θ. In block form, one can think of this as involving mixed
Hessian blocks of Li and Lj weighted by gradient components of Lj and Li , respectively.
    The following lemma abstracts the usual “commutator is bounded by mixed Hessians times gra-
dients” calculation to the modular setting and captures those parts of the commutator controlled
by out-of-support gradients and cross-support Hessians. Additional in-support terms arising from
overlapping supports are handled via pairwise confusion costs in the approximate categorical the-
orem in Appendix A.

Lemma 1 (Causal modularity implies small commutator contributions). Suppose the family {Lt }
is (εg , εh )-causally modular, with all ∇Lt uniformly bounded by Gmax in norm. Then there exists a
constant C depending only on the modularization such that, for all i 6= j and all θ in the training
region, the contribution to [Xi , Xj ](θ) coming from cross-support Hessian blocks and out-of-support
gradients obeys
                               k[Xi , Xj ](θ)kcross ≤ C (εh Gmax + εg Hmax ) ,
where Hmax bounds the within-support Hessian blocks in norm. In the special case where supports
are disjoint, this bound controls the full commutator.

Sketch. Write the gradient and Hessian in block form with respect to the modules. Within each
context t, blocks linking modules outside St to those inside St are bounded by εh , and gradient
components outside St are bounded by εg . Expanding [Xi , Xj ] in block form shows that every term
that involves a cross-support Hessian block or an out-of-support gradient either contains a cross-
Hessian block (bounded by εh ) times a gradient (bounded by Gmax ), or a within-support Hessian
block (bounded by Hmax ) times an out-of-support gradient (bounded by εg ). Summing over finitely
many modules produces the stated bound with some combinatorial constant C. When supports
are disjoint, there are no in-support overlap terms and this bound controls the entire bracket.

    Thus, in a causally modular representation, a large part of the commutators of context vector
fields is small by construction, and the remaining contributions arise from overlaps in the supports
Si ∩ Sj ; these overlap terms are controlled in Appendix A by confusion costs that quantify how
strongly two contexts interact on their shared modules.

3.3   Sequential vs. joint training under small commutators
Let Ψth denote the time-h flow of Xt , and write a single training cycle as before:

                          Θseq = ΨThT ◦ · · · ◦ Ψ1h1 (θ0 ),         Θjoint = ΨΣ
                                                                              1 (θ0 ),
            P
with XΣ =     t ht Xt .


                                                      9
   General results on compositions of flows (via Taylor expansion or the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff
formula) give
                                     1X                              X         
                     Θseq − Θjoint =       hi hj [Xi , Xj ](θ0 ) + O    hi hj hk ,
                                     2
                                              i<j                          i,j,k

and hence, under a uniform bound k[Xi , Xj ](θ)k ≤ ε,
                                                     1 X
                                   kΘseq − Θjoint k ≤ ε  hi hj + O(h3 ),
                                                     2
                                                              i<j

where h = maxt ht .
   Moreover, the change in an earlier context’s loss Li after training under a later context j can
be bounded in terms of [Xi , Xj ] and Lipschitz constants of ∇Li . Informally, the more the new
context’s flow fails to commute with the old context’s flow, the more it pulls parameters off the old
context’s solution manifold. In the approximate categorical setting this is made precise by bounds
that depend only on the confusion costs of those pairs (i, j) that actually interfere.

3.4   The General Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem
We can now combine causal modularity and flow composition to state the main theorem.
Theorem 1 (General Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem). Let Θ be a smooth parameter manifold
and {Lt }Tt=1 a family of C 3 context-conditioned losses with Lipschitz gradients and bounded Hessians
on a convex training region N ⊂ Θ. Suppose:

  1. ( Causal modularity) There is a modularization θ = (θ(1) , . . . , θ(M ) ) and support sets St such
     that the family {Lt } is (εg , εh )-causally modular on N , with uniform bounds Gmax and Hmax
     on gradient norms and within-support Hessian blocks.
  2. ( Causal coding realizer) The learning algorithm in each context approximately follows gradient
     flow on Lt with respect to this modularization, using causal gates and pruning derived from
     (exact or approximate) do-influence. That is, the actual update vector field X̃t satisfies kX̃t −
     Xt k ≤ δ on N , and the gates are computed from influence estimates that agree (up to δ) with
     the true causal influence.
  3. ( Step sizes) Step sizes ht > 0 are small enough that all flows stay within N and higher-order
     error terms O(h3 ) can be neglected.

   Then there exists a constant C such that, for any initial θ0 ∈ N :
  1. ( Approximate commutativity) For all i 6= j and all θ ∈ N ,
                                                                          
                               k[X̃i , X̃j ](θ)k ≤ C εh Gmax + εg Hmax + δ := εcomm ,

      where εcomm should be understood as a worst-case bound that can be refined in terms of pairwise
      confusion costs as in the approximate categorical theorem.
  2. ( Sequential ≈ joint) Let Ψ̃tht be the time-ht flow of X̃t , and Ψ̃Σ
                                                                        1 the time-1 flow of X̃Σ :=
     P
        t ht X̃t . Then
                                                  1      X
                              kΘ̃seq − Θ̃joint k ≤ εcomm     hi hj + O(h3 ),
                                                  2
                                                                    i<j

      where Θ̃seq = Ψ̃ThT ◦ · · · ◦ Ψ̃1h1 (θ0 ) and Θ̃joint = Ψ̃Σ
                                                                1 (θ0 ).


                                                         10
  3. ( Forgetting bound) For any earlier context i and later context j, the change in Li after a
     step on context j satisfies

                           |Li (θafter j ) − Li (θbefore j )| ≤ Kij hi hj εcomm + O(h3 ),

      where Kij depends on Lipschitz constants of ∇Li along the trajectory. In particular, catas-
      trophic forgetting is ruled out in the limit εcomm → 0 and small ht , and more refined bounds
      that depend only on confusing pairs are given by the approximate categorical theorem in Ap-
      pendix A.

Sketch. Item (1) follows by combining Lemma 1 (applied to Xt ) with the fact that replacing Xt
by X̃t perturbs commutators by at most O(δ). Overlapping-support contributions are further
controlled by pairwise confusion costs as in the enriched categorical setting.
    Item (2) is a direct application of the standard expansion for compositions of flows: the deviation
between the product of flows and the flow of the sum is given to second order by a sum of pairwise
commutators weighted by hi hj /2, plus higher-order nested commutators which are O(h3 ) under
our smoothness assumptions.
    Item (3) applies the mean value theorem to Li along the segment between Θ̃seq and Θ̃joint , plus
the bound from (2), to relate the change in Li to εcomm and Lipschitz constants of ∇Li . Details
are standard and omitted.

3.5   Informal interpretation
The theorem formalizes the philosophical story from the Introduction:

   • If the learner has found a representation in which each context touches only the modules it
     really needs (causal modularity), and the residual couplings between modules are small, then
     the context gradient fields almost commute. Causal coding is one concrete way to enforce
     this modularity.

   • When context flows almost commute, the difference between seeing contexts in sequence and
     seeing them jointly is a second-order effect controlled by pairwise commutators. In particular,
     later contexts cannot drastically degrade earlier ones unless the commutators are large, and
     the approximate categorical theorem refines this to show that only “confusing” pairs matter.

   • The independence/coupling tradeoff theorem tells you why the learner would want to be in
     the causal-modular regime: there, it achieves a good accuracy/compute tradeoff by keep-
     ing modules as independent as the data allow and only paying for explicit couplings where
     necessary.

   • Thus causal modeling (to identify the right modules) plus a drive to maximally independent
     representations (to sit on the Pareto frontier of the independence/coupling tradeoff) yields a
     regime in which continual learning is automatically well-behaved.

   In short: if you build and maintain the right causal factorization, the commutators shrink,
and so does forgetting, with the quality of continual learning degrading smoothly as modularity
assumptions are relaxed.




                                                     11
3.6    Making the theorem PAC for closer correlation to reality
Limitations and approximate categorical variants. Theorem 1, as stated above, should be
read as a clean, worst-case continuous instantiation of the general idea rather than as the final word.
Its hypotheses pack all violations of modularity and commutativity into a single uniform parameter
εcomm , and the resulting bounds use this worst-case constant for every pair of contexts. In practice,
however, neither exact modularity nor uniform commutator bounds are realistic: contexts typically
have overlapping supports and some pairs of contexts interact much more strongly than others. The
continuous theorem also does not explicitly separate the different sources of non-commutativity
(overlaps in Si ∩ Sj versus approximation errors in the update rule), but rather folds them into a
single quantity.
     To address this, Appendix A develops an approximate categorical version of the CCL theorem
in a metric-enriched monoidal setting. There we make explicit two kinds of error: (i) a locality error
εc for each context c, measuring how far its update Uc is from an ideal context-local map that acts
only on its intended support Sc , and (ii) an ideal commutator defect ∆c,c0 for each pair of contexts,
measuring how far their ideal updates fail to commute. These combine into a per-pair confusion cost
δc,c0 , and the main approximate categorical theorem shows that path-dependence and forgetting
error can be bounded by a sum over these confusion costs. In particular, the deviation between
sequential and joint updates is shown to scale linearly in the number and magnitude of genuinely
confusing context pairs, rather than in the square of the total number of contexts.
     The continuous and discrete specializations in the main text arise as instances of this enriched
categorical picture: in the smooth case we take Θ to be a parameter manifold, Uc to be small-
gradient flows for Lc , and dΘ to measure performance distance; in the discrete case we take Θ
to be a configuration space with a metric d and Uc to be non-expansive update maps. In both
cases the categorical PAC-style formulation replaces the single, global εcomm of Theorem 1 by a
structured family of errors {εc , ∆c,c0 } and makes clear how continual-learning guarantees degrade
smoothly as modularity assumptions are relaxed. This refined perspective is important for practical
applications: real systems are only approximately modular, and it is the sparsity and weakness of
the confusion graph (rather than exact disjointness) that determines how robust sequential training
will be.


4     Continuous-variable specialization
The previous section was already stated in a smooth setting. Here we make the gradient-flow
assumptions explicit and connect more directly to standard continuous-time analysis.

4.1    Continuous parameter manifolds and gradient flows
Assume Θ ⊆ Rd is open and each Lt is C 3 . Define the gradient vector fields Xt = −∇Lt and flows
Ψth as before. We assume:

    • Lipschitz gradient: k∇Lt (θ) − ∇Lt (θ0 )k ≤ Lt kθ − θ0 k for all θ, θ0 in a convex region N , with
      uniform bound Lt ≤ L.

    • Bounded Hessian: k∇2 Lt (θ)k ≤ H on N .

    • PL inequality (optional): 21 k∇Lt (θ)k2 ≥ µ(Lt (θ) − L∗t ), ensuring gradient descent converges
      linearly to a minimum.



                                                  12
   Under these assumptions, classical ODE theory justifies the Taylor expansions of flows and the
Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff truncations used in Theorem 1.

4.2   Explicit Lie-bracket bounds
In coordinates, the Lie bracket for gradient fields can be written as

                         [Xi , Xj ](θ) = −∇2 Lj (θ)∇Li (θ) + ∇2 Li (θ)∇Lj (θ).

In block form with respect to a parameter split θ = (u, v), this yields
                                                                                            !
                                         (j) (i)        (j) (i)       (i) (j)     (i) (j)
                                      −Huu gu − Huv gv + Huu gu + Huv gv
                    [Xi , Xj ](θ) =     (j) (i)  (j) (i)  (i) (j)  (i) (j)                      ,
                                      −Hvu gu − Hvv gv + Hvu gu + Hvv gv
        (t)
where H·· are Hessian blocks of Lt and g (t) the corresponding gradient blocks.
    If causal coding and pruning have suppressed the mixed blocks Huv and Hvu , then the commu-
tator norm is dominated by within-block Hessians times cross-block gradients—exactly the pattern
                                            (t)     (t)            (t)
captured in Lemma 1. Quantitatively, if kHuv k, kHvu k ≤ εh and kgv k ≤ εg , then

                                  k[Xi , Xj ](θ)k ≤ 2Hεg + 2Gmax εh ,

with H a bound on within-block Hessians and Gmax a bound on gradient norms. Overlaps in the
supports Si ∩ Sj contribute additional terms that can be bounded in terms of confusion costs δi,j
as in Appendix A.
    Thus the continuous specialization of Theorem 1 is essentially Theorem 1 itself, with explicit
continuous-time constants and with more refined, overlap-sensitive versions available via the cate-
gorical approximate CCL theorem.


5     Discrete-variable specialization
We now give a version that does not assume a differentiable structure at all. This captures, for
example, symbolic program rewriting systems, finite-state controllers, or modular networks updated
by discrete rules.

5.1   Abstract endomorphisms and commutators
Let Θ be an arbitrary set of states or configurations. A context t is represented at the update
level by an endomorphism Ut : Θ → Θ (e.g. one training epoch or one adaptation step under that
context). Sequential updates across a sequence of contexts 1, . . . , T give

                                       Θseq = UT ◦ · · · ◦ U1 (θ0 ).

We can also consider a “joint” update UΣ that approximates the effect of training on some combi-
nation of contexts (e.g. stochastic mixtures of minibatches from different parts of the data stream).
   To talk about “small” deviations we equip Θ with a (pseudo)metric d : Θ × Θ → [0, ∞), or
more generally with an enrichment in a quantale of costs/effects. For simplicity assume a metric.
   Define the discrete commutator of two updates Ui , Uj at a point θ by

                             Cij (θ) := Uj (Ui (θ)),        Cji (θ) := Ui (Uj (θ)).

We say Ui and Uj commute up to ε if d(Cij (θ), Cji (θ)) ≤ ε for all θ.

                                                       13
5.2   Discrete causal modularity
Suppose we have a decomposition of state into components θ = (θ(1) , . . . , θ(M ) ) and a notion of
projection π (m) : Θ → Θ(m) (for instance Θ is a product space). For each context t we define a
support set St and say that Ut is locally causal if it changes components in St arbitrarily but affects
components outside St only through small, bounded interactions.
   One way to formalize this is:
Definition 2 (Discrete causal
                           Q modularity).    We say a family {Ut } is ε-causally modular if there
exists a decomposition Θ ∼
                         = m  Θ(m) and support sets S such that, for all θ and all m ∈
                                                         t                            / St ,

                                d π (m) (Ut (θ)), π (m) (θ) ≤ ε.
                                                           

    That is, each context-conditioned update Ut leaves non-support modules almost fixed.
    In a causal-coding implementation, this arises from gates that freeze modules with negligible
do-influence for the current context, and from pruning that removes cross-module couplings. The
metric d can capture, for example, differences in loss, in causal influence structure, or in a summary
of the state.

5.3   Discrete Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem
Theorem 2 (Discrete Causal-Continual-Learning). Let Θ be a metric space with metric d, and let
{Ut }Tt=1 be a family of endomorphisms that is ε-causally modular with respect to some decomposition
and support sets St . Suppose further that each Ut is non-expansive in d (Lipschitz constant ≤ 1).
    Then there exists K depending only on the decomposition such that, for all i 6= j and all θ,
                                                             
                                   d Uj (Ui (θ)), Ui (Uj (θ)) ≤ Kε.

In particular, the deviation between sequential and joint updates after one cycle is bounded by
O(T 2 ε) in d, and the change in any context-specific evaluation functional that is Lipschitz in d is
bounded by O(T 2 ε) as well. Appendix A shows how this worst-case O(T 2 ) scaling can be refined
to bounds that depend linearly on the number and magnitude of pairwise confusion costs δi,j , and
hence on the number of genuinely confusing context pairs rather than all T 2 pairs.
Sketch. Because each Ut leaves non-support modules almost fixed, composing Ui and Uj in different
orders can only differ to the extent that their supports overlap and propagate into non-support
modules. The number of overlapping modules and the depth of such propagation is bounded by
a constant depending on the decomposition. Each application introduces at most ε disturbance
per non-support module, and non-expansiveness prevents amplification. Thus the total divergence
between Uj Ui and Ui Uj is at most Kε for some constant K. A union bound over pairs and steps
then gives the O(T 2 ε) bound for a full cycle.

    This theorem is the discrete analog of Theorem 1: causal modularity (in the sense of almost
disjoint supports) implies small commutators and hence bounded forgetting, without any differ-
entiability assumption. The approximate categorical CCL theorem in Appendix A shows how to
sharpen this to bounds that depend linearly on the number and strength of confusing context pairs.

5.4   Categorical viewpoint (very briefly)
Both the continuous and discrete versions can be seen as instances of a more general categorical
statement: in a symmetric monoidal category C enriched in a quantale Q, with an object de-
composed as a tensor product of causal subsystems, a family of endomorphisms that each act as

                                                  14
identity on all but their support factors, and whose nontrivial actions are Q-small outside support,
will compose in an almost-commutative way with respect to the Q-order. The metric d or the norm
on vector fields is then just one choice of such an enrichment.
    The details of the categorical formulation, including approximate variants with confusion costs,
are given in Appendix A at the end of the paper.


6     Application to causal-coding neural networks
We now specialize the continuous theorem to causal-coding predictive networks.

6.1    Parameter modularization
In a typical PC/CC decoder we can take the parameter vector to be grouped into:

    • vertical weights W (`) between layers;

    • lateral weights L(`) within layers;

    • possibly biases and normalization parameters.

A natural modularization is to treat each vertical or lateral weight block (as a matrix, convolutional
kernel, head, or channel) as a module θ(m) .

6.2    Causal gates and clarity as enforcers of modularity
Causal coding estimates do-influence matrices C layerwise, either exactly (via Hessians) or approx-
imately (via Fisher surrogates or learned approximators). It then:

    • constructs gates rji ∝ |Cji |p to modulate weight updates, suppressing updates on edges with
      negligible causal influence;

    • applies clarity or diffusion-based penalties that shrink or prune lateral edges whose effect can
      be reproduced by multi-hop paths.

    These mechanisms directly shrink:

    • gradients of Lt with respect to parameters that have negligible do-influence in context t
      (reducing εg );

    • effective mixed Hessian blocks between modules that do not share strong causal paths (re-
      ducing εh ).

    Thus, under sustained causal coding, the network is driven into a regime where the loss family
{Lt } associated with different contexts is (εg , εh )-causally modular in the sense of Definition 1,
and where pairwise confusion costs between contexts are small for all but a sparse set of genuinely
interacting context pairs.




                                                  15
6.3    Resulting continual-learning guarantees
Given the above, Theorem 1 applies with:

    • modules corresponding to vertical and lateral weight blocks, attention heads, channels, etc.;

    • support sets St corresponding to those modules whose gates are non-negligible in context t;

    • εg , εh controlled by gate selectivity, pruning thresholds, and the amount of variance in do-
      influence estimates.

   If causal coding is aggressive enough (strong sparsity, strong clarity penalties) to keep εcomm
and the confusion costs small, then:

    • one pass through a stream of contexts is close (in parameter space and in function space) to
      a joint step on the corresponding mixture loss;

    • the degradation in performance under earlier contexts when adapting to new ones is bounded
      by a term proportional to εcomm and to the number of confusing context pairs encountered;

    • catastrophic forgetting can only occur when contexts genuinely conflict at the causal level
      (i.e. when they require incompatible assignments to the same causal modules).

    In this way, causal coding provides a principled mechanism to achieve the structural condi-
tions (causal modularity, small commutators, sparse confusion graph) that make continual learning
robust.


7     Application to PC Transformers
Next we sketch how the approach we are exploring applies to predictive-coding Transformers aug-
mented with causal coding.

7.1    Modularization in a Transformer
In a Transformer block we can distinguish several natural modules:
                              (h)   (h)   (h)   (h)
    • self-attention heads (WQ , WK , WV , WO ) for each head h;

    • feed-forward channels (rows of the feed-forward matrices);

    • layer-norm and positional-encoding parameters.

   A PC Transformer introduces additional “activity” parameters for each layer (the PC value
nodes) and inference dynamics over them, but the weight parameters remain grouped in the same
way.




                                                16
7.2   Causal coding at the head/channel level
A causal-coding PC Transformer would:

   • estimate interventional influence of each head/channel on downstream prediction errors (e.g.
     how much the equilibrium distribution at some layer changes under do-interventions on that
     head);

   • build gates per head (and possibly per token) based on these influences;

   • apply clarity penalties to prune attention links and channels that are redundant with others
     (e.g. via diffusion on the token/head graph).

    Intuitively, most of the time many heads are not causally necessary for a given input and
surrounding context; gates can shut them off, making their parameters modules outside the support
set St for that context. Clarity penalties discourage diffuse, multi-hop attention patterns when
direct edges suffice.

7.3   Causal modularity and commutators for Transformer contexts
In this setting, contexts might be different input domains, prompt styles, interaction regimes,
or implicit tasks defined by user intent. Each context t induces a loss Lt on the Transformer
parameters. Under a causal-coding regime:

   • For a given context, only a subset of heads and channels (support modules) receive strong
     gradient updates; gradients on other modules are suppressed by gates (small εg ).

   • Mixed Hessian blocks coupling support modules for one context to support modules unique
     to another context shrink as the representation is refactorized and the network learns to
     route context-specific information along dedicated paths (small εh ), and confusion costs are
     concentrated on a sparse set of overlapping contexts.

   Thus, the family {Lt } becomes causally modular with respect to the head/channel decom-
position, satisfying the hypotheses of Theorem 1 and the approximate categorical CCL theorem.
Consequently:

   • The gradient flows for different contexts approximately commute; training under one contex-
     tual distribution and then another is close to training on the mixture, with a deviation that
     grows linearly in the number of confusing context pairs.

   • Catastrophic forgetting is bounded: behavior in “old” contexts is only harmed by “new”
     contexts to the extent that they really share and conflict over the same heads and channels.

   • The independence/coupling tradeoff provides design guidance: invest Route A effort in finding
     a head/channel factorization that makes contexts as independent as possible, and Route B
     effort in explicit cross-token attention only where causal evidence demands it.

    This suggests a principled route to continual learning in Transformer-like architectures: use
predictive coding to get local error signals and biologically-plausible inference, use causal coding to
discover and enforce a modular causal factorization over heads and channels, and rely on the general
and approximate Causal-Continual-Learning Theorems to guarantee that, once this factorization


                                                  17
is in place, sequential adaptation across a stream of contexts will behave similarly to joint training
and will not catastrophically forget.
     Appendix B fleshes out this proposed application further, elaborating a hypothetical concrete
example of how a causal coding based transformer might deal with prompts spanning different
contexts.


8     Application to incremental compression as a learning approach
Slightly more adventurously, we now explore how the general relationship between causal coding
and continual learning might manifest itself in the context of a different (non-neural) sort of learning
mechanism: incremental compression a la the WILLIAM algorithm. The goal here is not to claim
that arbitrary incremental compressors will automatically become modular, but rather to propose
a class of causal IC update rules that are designed to satisfy the CCL hypotheses and to illustrate
how the general theory informs the design.

8.1    Incremental-compression-style causal coding and continual learning
Informally, the difference between ordinary WILLIAM-style incremental compression and the causal-
incremental version here is about how much the system remembers which patterns were learned for
which contexts, and how it adapts its bias toward sharing structure across contexts versus keeping
it separate.
    In plain incremental compression (as in WILLIAM), there is a single global feature library.
Whenever new data arrives, the system just tries to improve overall compression on that data: it
adds new features, refits old ones, and may prune features that no longer help. If the stream of
data is a mixture of many contexts, then from the compressor’s point of view there is just one
big distribution. It has no explicit reason to protect features that were important for some earlier
context but are not helpful for the current batch, nor to regulate how aggressively features are
shared across contexts.
    Depending on hyperparameters, this can fail in two opposite ways:

    • If refitting and pruning are aggressive, then when a new context arrives the search procedure
      will happily reshape or delete features that used to explain an old context well. Compression
      on the new context improves, but compression on the old one can get much worse. This is a
      form of catastrophic forgetting.

    • If we make the system very conservative (strong regularization, weak refitting, strict pruning
      thresholds) to avoid forgetting, then the global library becomes biased toward the earliest or
      most frequent contexts. New contexts are forced to reuse old features even when they are not
      a good fit, so adaptation to new contexts becomes slow and brittle.

   The causal-incremental scheme described below tries to thread the needle. We still use incre-
mental compression and refitting, but we:

    • organize the feature library into modules;

    • measure, per context, how much each module actually helps compression (a kind of do-
      influence);

    • update only the modules that really matter for the current context, freezing the others;


                                                   18
   • add a clarity penalty so that features do not try to simultaneously explain many unrelated
     contexts, and meta-learn the strength and shape of this penalty from experience so that the
     system automatically chooses how much sharing versus separation is appropriate for a given
     environment.

    In the ideal limit, each context mostly updates its own subset of modules, shared modules only
carry genuinely shared structure, and the meta-learned clarity penalties settle into a regime where
useful sharing is kept and spurious overlap is discouraged. Updates for different contexts then
almost commute, so training on contexts in different orders gives almost the same library and the
same compression performance. This is exactly the situation captured by the discrete/categorical
Causal-Continual-Learning theorems: context updates are almost factorwise endomorphisms, so
sequential multi-context learning has bounded forgetting. The construction below should be read
as a design pattern that realizes these hypotheses for incremental compression, not as a claim that
arbitrary IC schemes will converge to a modular representation on their own.

8.2    Contexts, feature libraries, and modules
Fix string length N and a family of contexts c ∈ C, each given by a distribution Pc over {0, 1}N . For
a given context c and string x ∼ Pc , an incremental decomposition is a sequence of features F =
(f1 , . . . , fs ) and residual rs as in the incremental compression framework: a feature is an invertible,
length-preserving program f with description length K(f ), residuals evolve via ri = fi (ri−1 ), and
the total two-part code length is
                                                    s
                                                    X
                                    Ls (F ; x) :=         K(fi ) + K(rs ),
                                                    i=1

with efficiency
                                                 N − Ls (F ; x)
                                   η(F ; x) :=                  ∈ [0, 1].
                                                  N − K(x)
    The learner does not start from scratch for each context; instead it maintains a global feature
library and reuses it. Formally, the internal state is

                                         Θ = (F (1) , . . . , F (K) ),

where each F (k) is a finite set of short features and the K blocks are treated as modules or causal
factors. Think of F (1) as “low-level image patches”, F (2) as “layout templates”, F (3) as “text
overlays”, and so on, but in a purely algorithmic/incremental-coding sense.
    In addition, we will allow each module to carry a small collection of meta-parameters controlling
clarity and sharing, for example per-feature or per-module clarity weights. For notational simplicity
we continue to write Θ for the whole library state, understanding that these meta-parameters live
inside the modules alongside the features.
    Given Θ and a context c, the compressor is allowed to use features from all modules, but we will
explicitly track how much each module matters. Let Lc (Θ) denote the expected two-part description
length (over Pc ) when we run some fixed incremental-coding search (for example greedy-with-refit
or PGM-guided search) using only features from Θ. We define a simple metric on states:

                                   d(Θ, Θ0 ) := sup Lc (Θ) − Lc (Θ0 ) .
                                                 c∈C




                                                       19
Context supports and do-influence. For each context c and module k, define a do-influence
number by the counterfactual compression gap

                                    I(c, k; Θ) := Lc (Θ\k ) − Lc (Θ),

where Θ\k is obtained from Θ by disabling all features in F (k) (we run the same incremental search
but are not allowed to use those features). Intuitively, I(c, k; Θ) is how many bits we lose on context
c if we intervene to delete module k.
     Given a threshold τ > 0, we define the support of context c at state Θ as

                                    Sc (Θ) := {k : I(c, k; Θ) ≥ τ }.

Modules outside Sc (Θ) are (at this scale) causally irrelevant for compressing c.

8.3   An incremental-causal update rule for a new context
We now describe a “causal coding esque” update rule Uc : Θ → Θ for training on a batch of data
from context c.
   Given current library Θ and a finite sample Dc = {x(1) , . . . , x(m) } from Pc , one update step for
context c proceeds as follows.

  1. Estimate do-influences and supports. Approximate Lc (Θ) and Lc (Θ\k ) by running the
     incremental compressor on Dc with and without module k, and compute I(c, k; Θ). Form the
     support
                                Sc := Sc (Θ) = {k : I(c, k; Θ) ≥ τ }
      for a chosen threshold τ . Optionally define soft gates rc,k := ψ(I(c, k; Θ)) ∈ [0, 1] with some
      monotone schedule ψ.

  2. Context-local feature refinement (within support). For each k ∈ Sc , run a one- or
     few-step incremental-compression search restricted to features in F (k) plus candidate new
     features proposed from the residuals on Dc , using some algorithm such as greedy-with-refit,
     beam search, or PGM-guided search. Within each module we:

        • add new short features f that achieve positive net gain on Dc ;
        • refit all features in F (k) ∪ {f } jointly against Dc , so that they re-center on the structure
          specific to k (preventing earlier features from absorbing higher-level structure, as in the
          single-context refit analysis);
        • keep track, for each f ∈ F (k) , of its per-context gain γc (f ) and cost τ (f ).

  3. Clarity / de-overlap across contexts, with meta-learned strength. To prevent mod-
     ules from becoming entangled across contexts, we introduce a clarity penalty that discourages
     features from carrying redundant mass for many unrelated contexts. Concretely, maintain
     for each feature f the vector γc (f ) of per-context gains and define its cross-context overlap
                                                  X
                                 Overlap(f ) :=       min{γc (f ), γc0 (f )}.
                                                   c6=c0

      Rather than fixing a single hand-chosen penalty weight, we treat a family of clarity weights
      λf ≥ 0 (or, more coarsely, λk per module) as part of the state Θ, and update them by a slow
      meta-learning rule.

                                                   20
      During refitting for context c we minimize an objective of the schematic form
                                                       X
                                   L̃c (Θ) := Lc (Θ) +   λf Overlap(f ),
                                                       f

      and after processing several contexts we take meta-steps that adjust the λf to improve long-
      run multi-context performance, for example by approximately decreasing a global meta-loss
                                                         X
                           Lmeta (Θ, λ) := Ec∼π Lc (Θ) + κ     λf Overlap(f )
                                                              f

      for some sampling distribution π over contexts and tradeoff parameter κ. Intuitively, the
      meta-learner increases λf when a feature’s overlap looks like unhelpful “diffuse sharing” (small
      extra compression in many contexts that could be better explained by more local features),
      and decreases λf when sharing truly improves compression on multiple related contexts.
      Operationally, this encourages the learner to:

        • keep truly shared structure in a dedicated “shared” module with appropriately small
          penalties;
        • split features that mix unrelated contexts into separate, more local features;
        • prune features that contribute only tiny extra compression on many contexts (that is,
          weak, diffusive features).

      This is the analogue of clarity or diffusion penalties in causal coding, but now with the
      penalty strengths themselves adapted online so that the amount of enforced separation or
      sharing matches the environment.

  4. Freezing outside support. For k ∈       / Sc , we freeze the module: no new features are added
     to F (k) and existing features in F (k) are not refit on Dc . In practice one can allow extremely
     small meta-updates (for example annealed smoothing of global statistics or of clarity weights),
     but we assume these are bounded by a small εleak in the metric d defined above.

    The net result is a map Uc : Θ → Θ0 which only significantly modifies the modules in Sc , and
does so using an incremental-compression objective that explicitly penalizes cross-context overlap
with penalty strengths that are themselves meta-learned from experience. This Uc is by construction
designed to satisfy the discrete CCL hypotheses with small leakage and overlap, making it a concrete
instantiation of the general theory.

8.4   Structural assumptions for multi-context incremental compressibility
To connect this to the general CCL theorem, we need the analogue of “causal modularity” for
incremental compression.
    Assume that:

   • Each context c is generated by a short-feature hierarchical generative model (SF-HGM) with
     kc levels and bounded cross-information δ between levels, as in the incremental-compression
     analysis. This implies that strings from Pc admit kc -incremental decompositions with high
     efficiency η ≥ 1 − O(δkc ), using short features with small overlaps.



                                                 21
   • The contexts themselves are not maximally entangled: there is a factorization of the causal
     structure such that, after an appropriate change of variables, each context c uses only a subset
     Sc of the modules, and cross-context mutual information between modules is bounded (same
     spirit as bounded cross-information, now across contexts rather than across levels).

   • The incremental search (greedy-with-refit, PGM-guided, and so on) is strong enough to re-
     cover near-optimal, low-overlap features for each context when restricted to its support mod-
     ules, as in the single-context results; and the meta-learning rule for the clarity weights λf
     converges (in a coarse sense) to a regime where features with large, unhelpful cross-context
     overlap are either moved into explicitly shared modules or pruned, so that the residual “dif-
     fusive” overlap remains uniformly small.

    Under these assumptions, we can choose the modules Θk so that each context’s best incremen-
tal decomposition lives almost entirely inside its support modules, and the meta-learned clarity
penalties keep cross-context overlaps small, making the confusion graph sparse and the discrete
CCL bounds tight.

8.5   Incremental-Compression Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem
We now state a discrete CCL theorem specialized to this setting.

Theorem 3 (Incremental-compression CCL). Let Θ be a feature library factorized into modules
Θ = (Θ1 , . . . , ΘK ), with metric

                                 d(Θ, Θ0 ) = sup |Lc (Θ) − Lc (Θ0 )|.
                                             c∈C

Let {Uc : Θ → Θ}c∈C be the context-update maps defined by the gated, refit-and-clarify rule above,
including the slow meta-updates of the clarity weights.
    Assume:

  1. Context-locality. For each context c there is a support Sc ⊆ {1, . . . , K} such that, for all
     states Θ in the training region,
                                                            
                  d Uc (Θ), Θ ≤ εtot ,  d πk (Uc (Θ)), πk (Θ) ≤ εleak for all k ∈/ Sc ,

      where πk projects Θ to its kth module and εleak  εtot measures leakage outside the support.

  2. Non-expansiveness. Each Uc is 1-Lipschitz with respect to d, i.e.

                            d Uc (Θ), Uc (Θ0 ) ≤ d(Θ, Θ0 ) for all Θ, Θ0 .
                                              


  3. Small cross-context overlap. The combination of SF-HGM structure and the meta-learned
     clarity weights enforces that whenever c 6= c0 and k ∈ Sc \ Sc0 , the incremental gain of context
     c0 from features in module k is at most εoverlap in normalized units. Equivalently, after the
     meta-learner has had time to adapt, any feature that still carries large overlap for many
     unrelated contexts must live in a dedicated shared module whose contribution is accounted for
     separately, and the remaining “context-specific” modules are nearly disjoint in their effective
     support.




                                                   22
   Then there is a constant K0 (depending only on the number of modules) and an aggregate locality
parameter                                                      
                                    εIC := K0 εleak + εoverlap
such that:

  1. Small commutators. For any two contexts c, c0 and any state Θ,
                                                            
                                d Uc (Uc0 (Θ)), Uc0 (Uc (Θ)) ≤ εIC .

  2. Sequential vs. joint training. Let c1 , . . . , cT be a finite sequence of contexts and let

                                         Θseq := UcT ◦ · · · ◦ Uc1 (Θ0 )

      be the result of training on them once in that order. LetPUΣ denote an idealized joint update
      that optimally improves compression on the mixture T1 t Pct . Then

                                       d Θseq , UΣ (Θ0 ) ≤ O(T 2 εIC ),
                                                        


      with Appendix A giving refined bounds in terms of the number of confusing pairs.

  3. Forgetting bound. For any old context c that appears early in the sequence and any interme-
     diate state Θ, the degradation in compression of Pc caused by a later update Uc0 satisfies
                                                                  
                                     Lc (Uc0 (Θ)) − Lc (Θ) ≤ O εIC ,

      and the total loss on Pc after training on c1 , . . . , cT is bounded by O(T 2 εIC ). In particular,
      catastrophic forgetting is ruled out in the regime εIC → 0 with moderate T .

Idea of proof. The context-locality and small-overlap assumptions imply that each Uc acts as an
almost identity on modules outside Sc and as a local endomorphism on modules in Sc , with only
εleak disturbance elsewhere. This is an instance of the discrete CCL setting: the modules play
the role of causal factors, the supports Sc are context supports, and εleak and εoverlap bound the
deviation from perfect factorwise updates.
    The discrete CCL theorem then gives that the commutator Uc ◦ Uc0 versus Uc0 ◦ Uc is bounded
by a constant times the leakage, yielding item (1). Standard estimates on compositions of non-
expansive maps with small pairwise commutators give the O(T 2 εIC ) bound between sequential
and joint updates, and the forgetting bound follows by applying the mean value inequality to
the context-wise losses Lc along the interpolating path between Θseq and UΣ (Θ0 ). The refined
approximate categorical theorem shows how to replace the T 2 factor by a dependence on the
number of confusing pairs.
    Intuitively, updates for different contexts almost commute because they work on almost disjoint
sets of modules, and where they do overlap, the clarity penalty (with meta-learned weights) ensures
the incremental-compression overlap is small. This directly mirrors the neural-network story where
small mixed Hessian blocks imply small gradient commutators.

8.6   Categorical viewpoint
Categorically, this example fits the general picture by taking:



                                                    23
   • P to be the category whose objects are feature libraries, morphisms are incremental-compression
     update procedures (including their associated meta-learned clarity weights), and the monoidal
     product ⊗ is componentwise concatenation of modules;

   • Θ ≈ Θ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ΘK to be the factorization of the feature library into modules;

   • each Uc to be a context-local endomorphism that is (up to the small errors above) the identity
     on all factors k ∈
                      / Sc .
                                                                                          N (k)
    In the idealized zero-leakage limit εleak = εoverlap = 0, each Uc literally factors as k Uc with
  (k)
Uc = id for k ∈   / Sc , so the categorical GCL theorem applies and context updates with disjoint
supports commute on the nose. The incremental-compression CCL theorem above then quantifies
how this picture degrades gracefully when the supports are only approximately disjoint and overlaps
are small but nonzero, and the meta-learned clarity weights act as an automatic regulator that keeps
the system in the good regime.

8.7   One more step: McBride-inspired gradient guidance for causal incremental
      compression
We now outline one more possibly interesting step toward “causal coding”-izing incremental com-
pression.
    The incremental-compression update rule in the previous subsections treats the feature library
Θ as a purely discrete object: at each context c the learner proposes a finite set of candidate
edits (adding, removing, or modifying short features) and accepts those that improve a two-part
code-length objective. In this subsection we sketch how to augment this search with a light-weight,
“McBride-derivative-inspired” gradient and curvature estimate on library space, so that candidate
edits are ranked not only by their raw local compression gain but by an approximate information-
geometric score.
    The formal justification for viewing feature libraries as living on a smooth manifold, and for
defining a Fisher metric and natural gradient on this manifold using McBride-style derivatives of
programs, is left to a companion paper. Here we only describe the practical pattern: how to use
gradient-ish and Hessian-ish quantities to guide otherwise discrete incremental-compression moves.

Mathematical idea (informal). Fix a context c and a current library Θ. As before, let Lc (Θ)
denote the expected two-part code length on data from context c when we run a fixed incremental-
compression search using Θ.
   We conceptually treat the library as a vector of coordinates

                                           Θ = (θf )f ∈F ,

with one coordinate θf per feature f (or per small group of features, or per module; the exact
granularity is a design choice). For each feature f we estimate a “directional derivative”

                                                     ∂Lc (Θ)
                                         gc [f ] ≈           ,
                                                      ∂θf

measuring how much Lc would change if we nudged the presence or strength of f . Concretely, we
approximate gc [f ] using compression gaps already computed by the incremental compressor, e.g.
by comparing Lc (Θ) with the loss when f (or the module containing f ) is disabled.


                                                 24
   Similarly, we approximate a diagonal Fisher (or Gauss-Newton) term

                              Gc [f, f ] ≈ Ex∼Pc (∂θf log pΘ (x))2 ,
                                                                 


which heuristically measures curvature or “stiffness” of the loss in the direction of f . In practice
we estimate Gc [f, f ] from the variability of the per-example compression effect of f , again using
quantities the incremental compressor already computes.
   Now consider a discrete candidate move m that edits the library in a small way: add a feature,
remove a feature, or refine a feature inside some module. We associate to m a sparse “move vector”
δΘm with components
                                   
                                   +1 if m adds or strengthens feature f ,
                                   
                         δΘm [f ] = −1 if m removes or weakens feature f ,
                                   
                                     0     otherwise.
                                   

In these coordinates, the first-order change in Lc predicted by a Taylor expansion is
                                                         X
                                                >
                           ∆(1)
                             c (m) ≈ ∇Θ Lc (Θ) δΘm =         gc [f ] δΘm [f ].
                                                              f

The second-order term, using a diagonal Fisher / Gauss-Newton surrogate, is
                                   1                  1X
                      ∆(2)
                       c (m) ≈       δΘ>
                                       m Gc (Θ) δΘm =    Gc [f, f ] (δΘm [f ])2 .
                                   2                  2
                                                             f

We then define a simple information-geometric score for move m as

                Scorec (m) := −∆(1)            (2)
                                c (m) − λcurv ∆c (m) − λclar ClarityPenalty(m),                  (1)

where λcurv , λclar ≥ 0 are hyperparameters and ClarityPenalty(m) is any cross-context overlap
penalty of the kind already used in the causal IC clarity term. Intuitively:
         (1)
   • −∆c (m) is the predicted first-order benefit of m for context c (measured in bits saved).
       (2)
   • ∆c (m) penalizes moves that push strongly into directions where the loss is already highly
     curved or “stiff” in the Fisher sense.

   • ClarityPenalty(m) discourages edits that further entangle contexts or modules.

   Ranking candidate discrete moves by Scorec (m) and applying only those with positive score gives
a purely combinatorial search that is nevertheless guided by a McBride-inspired natural gradient
on the underlying program space.

Algorithmic recipe. We now sketch one possible implementation of the above idea, phrased
entirely in terms of quantities an incremental compressor already maintains. The key point is that
we never need to explicitly construct a continuous parameter manifold or a true McBride derivative;
we only need per-feature compression statistics and simple proxy formulas.
    We assume:

   • A feature library Θ = (F (1) , . . . , F (K) ) factorized into modules, as before.

                                                    25
   • A batch Dc of strings from context c.

   • Existing code that, given Θ and Dc , runs an incremental compression search (e.g. greedy-
     with-refit) and returns, for each feature f used during compression on Dc , its net bits saved
     on that batch.

A single McBride-guided causal IC update for context c can then be written as follows.




                                                26
Algorithm 1 Causal IC update with McBride-inspired gradient guidance
Require: Current library Θ, context c, data batch Dc
Require: Hyperparameters λcurv , λclar ≥ 0
Ensure: Updated library Θ0
 1: Run the usual incremental compressor on Dc using Θ, obtaining:

      • baseline code length estimate Lc (Θ);
      • per-feature statistics: for each feature f , usage count and net bits saved on Dc .
 2: For each feature f , estimate a gradient-like quantity

                                        gc [f ] ≈ −BitsSavedc (f ).

 3: For each feature f , estimate a diagonal Fisher-like quantity Gc [f, f ], for example by

                             Gc [f, f ] ≈ Average over strings in Dc gc [f ]2 .
                                                                             


 4: Using the existing IC machinery, construct a finite set Mc of candidate discrete moves m (add,
    remove, or modify features and modules) that are locally promising according to standard
    incremental-compression heuristics.
 5: for each move m ∈ Mc do
 6:     Define a sparse move vector δΘm [f ] with entries +1 or −1 for features touched by m and 0
    otherwise.
 7:     Compute the first-order gain
                                                    X
                                  lin gain(m) = −       gc [f ] δΘm [f ].
                                                           f

 8:    Compute the curvature cost (using diagonal Fisher)
                                                 1X
                               quad cost(m) =       Gc [f, f ] (δΘm [f ])2 .
                                                 2
                                                       f

 9:    Compute a clarity penalty ClarityPenalty(m) by summing the existing cross-context overlap
    penalties over all features touched by m.
10:    Define the McBride-inspired IG score

               Scorec (m) = lin gain(m) − λcurv quad cost(m) − λclar ClarityPenalty(m).

11: end for
12: Sort Mc in decreasing order of Scorec (m).
13: for each move m in this sorted order do
14:    if Scorec (m) ≤ 0 then
15:        break                                   . No further candidate move is predicted to help
16:    end if
17:    Tentatively apply m to Θ to obtain a candidate library Θm .
18:    Optionally run a short local refit inside the affected modules of Θm on Dc .
19:    Accept the move: set Θ ← Θm .
20: end for
21: return Θ0 ← Θ



                                                  27
    This procedure leaves the core incremental-compression machinery unchanged. It only adds
a scoring layer on top of the usual candidate-move generator, using quantities that are already
available (or cheap to compute) in a WILLIAM-style compressor. In this sense it is a “McBride-
inspired gradient descent”: we treat discrete edits of a library of short programs as approximate
steps along a hidden smooth manifold, and use a Fisher-style metric to decide which steps are most
promising. The formal analytic details required to mathematically justify this sort of approach are
more involved and are deferred to a separate information-geometric treatment of program spaces,
but the algorithmic picture is relatively simple and we hope we have presented it clearly.


A     A categorical formulation of causal continual learning
In this subsection we sketch a categorical formulation of the General Causal-Continual-Learning
Theorem. The goal is to isolate the structural ingredients that make continual learning / con-
tinual adaptation possible, in a way that is agnostic to whether the underlying state spaces are
continuous (manifolds, vector spaces) or discrete (finite sets, graphs). Both the continuous and
discrete instances in the main text then appear as special cases of the same abstract pattern, and
the approximate variants with explicit error bounds live naturally in this categorical setting.

A.1    Three layers of description as categories
We distinguish three levels of description, each naturally organized as a category:

    • An environment category E whose objects are data-generating contexts E (e.g. different do-
      mains, datasets, prompts, goals, or interaction regimes), and whose morphisms encode coarse
      transformations between contexts (restriction, domain shift, conditioning, etc.).

    • A category C of causal models (e.g. structural causal models or predictive-coding style gener-
      ative models). Objects C ∈ C are causal descriptions of contexts (variables plus mechanisms);
      morphisms are structure-preserving maps between such models.

    • A symmetric monoidal category (P, ⊗, I) of parameterized learners. Objects are parameter
      spaces (or state spaces) Θ, and morphisms U : Θ → Θ0 are update procedures or learning
      transforms. The monoidal product ⊗ represents factorized composition of subsystems; I is
      the trivial (unit) system. Endomorphisms EndP (Θ) model learning dynamics that map a
      parameter object back to itself.

    The flow “environment → causal model → learner” is captured by functors

                                    J : E → C,        M : C → P.

Given a context E ∈ E, J(E) is its causal model, and M (J(E)) is the corresponding learner-side
object (e.g. a PC/CC network configured to operate in that context). For simplicity we will assume
a fixed parameter object Θ ∈ Ob(P) shared across contexts, equipped with context-conditioned
update endomorphisms Ut : Θ → Θ.

A.2    Contexts as endomorphisms and continual learning as path-independence
A context t (in some index set of contexts) is represented at the learner level by an endomorphism

                                            Ut : Θ → Θ,

                                                 28
intuitively “update the learner once under context t with a small step size”. A continual-learning
/ continual-adaptation schedule for contexts t1 , . . . , tT then corresponds to the composite
                                        UtT ◦ · · · ◦ Ut1 : Θ → Θ.
In contrast, an idealized joint multi-context learner for a finite multiset of contexts {t1 , . . . , tT }
would be represented by a single “all-at-once” update
                                              UΣ : Θ → Θ,
obtained (informally) by training on, or adapting under, all contexts simultaneously. Catastrophic
forgetting or interference is precisely the failure of path-independence: different orders of composing
the Ut lead to substantially different effective maps, and these differ from UΣ .
    Categorically, good continual learning corresponds to the existence of canonical isomorphisms
                                     ασ : Utσ(T ) ◦ · · · ◦ Utσ(1) ⇒ UΣ
for each permutation σ of {1, . . . , T }, satisfying the usual coherence conditions. In the strict case
ασ = id for all σ, the Ut form a commuting family inside the monoid EndP (Θ):
                                   Uti ◦ Utj = Utj ◦ Uti    for all i, j.
The analytic commutator-based results in the gradient-flow setting (Section 3) give a quantita-
tive version of this statement in the smooth-manifold case, where the defect of commutativity is
measured by Lie brackets of vector fields.

A.3    Causal factorization as monoidal structure
The categorical step where causality enters is the assumption that contexts admit a factorization
into causal components, and that this factorization is respected functorially all the way down to
the learner.
    Formally, we assume:

   • The causal-model category C is symmetric monoidal with product ⊗ and unit IC .
   • For each context E, its causal model decomposes as
                                       J(E) ∼
                                            = C1 (E) ⊗ · · · ⊗ CK (E),
      where the Ck (E) are “causal factors” (subsystems whose internal dynamics are richly coupled,
      but whose cross-factor couplings are weak or absent after appropriate interventions).
   • The learner functor M is strong monoidal : there are natural isomorphisms
                             M (C ⊗ C 0 ) ∼
                                          = M (C) ⊗ M (C 0 ),             M (IC ) ∼
                                                                                  = I
      that are coherent in the usual sense. Thus
                           Θ(E) := M (J(E)) ∼
                                            = M (C1 (E)) ⊗ · · · ⊗ M (CK (E)).
      In words: causal factorization of a context induces a tensor factorization of the learner’s
      internal representation.

   We will henceforth suppress the explicit dependence on E when it is clear from context, writing
simply
                          Θ ∼= Θ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ΘK with Θk := M (Ck ).

                                                    29
A.4    Context-locality as factorwise endomorphisms
Causal coding is designed so that each context t “lives” on a subset of the causal factors. Categor-
ically, this is expressed by:

Definition 3 (Context-local update). Given a factorization Θ ∼  = Θ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ΘK , a context t is local
to a subset St ⊆ {1, . . . , K} if its update endomorphism Ut : Θ → Θ factors (up to the canonical
associativity/symmetry isomorphisms of P) as
                                                    (1)          (K)
                                              Ut ∼
                                                 = Ut ⊗ · · · ⊗ Ut ,
        (k)                       (k)
where Ut      : Θk → Θk and Ut          = idΘk for all k ∈
                                                         / St .
                    (k)
    Intuitively, Ut is the part of the update that adjusts the parameters devoted to causal factor
k, and the identity elsewhere means that factor is left untouched when adapting under context t.
Perfect causal disentangling would make St exactly the set of factors that are genuinely relevant
for that context.
    The central categorical observation is that the tensor product in a symmetric monoidal category
automatically makes such context-local updates commute when their supports are disjoint.

Lemma 2 (Disjoint-support commutativity). Let (P, ⊗, I) be a symmetric monoidal category, and
Θ∼ = Θ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ΘK . Suppose Us and Ut are context-local endomorphisms with supports Ss , St ⊆
{1, . . . , K} and Ss ∩ St = ∅. Then
                                       Us ◦ Ut ∼
                                               = Ut ◦ Us
via the canonical symmetry/associativity isomorphisms of P. In particular, they commute strictly
if we regard Θ as a strictly associative tensor and choose a fixed parenthesization.

Sketch. Up to canonical isomorphisms, we can write
                                               K                             K
                                                                                    (k)
                                    Us ∼                              Ut ∼
                                               O                             O
                                       =             Us(k) ,             =         Ut ,
                                               k=1                           k=1

       (k)                              (k)
with Us = id for k ∈  / Ss and Ut = id for k ∈
                                             / St . Because Ss and St are disjoint, for each factor
                   (k)   (k)
k at least one of Us , Ut is the identity. Composition distributes factorwise:
                                  K                                                K
                                                     (k)                                  (k)
                      Us ◦ Ut ∼                                       Ut ◦ Us ∼
                                  O                                                O
                                          Us(k) ◦ Ut                                             ◦ Us(k) .
                                                                                                        
                              =                              ,                =           Ut
                                   k=1                                             k=1

              (k)   (k)
If one of Us , Ut is id, the two compositions coincide on that factor; on all other factors both
are the identity. By the symmetry and associativity coherence laws, these factorwise equalities
assemble into an isomorphism Us ◦ Ut ∼      = Ut ◦ Us . In a strict monoidal presentation (Mac Lane
strictification), this is an actual equality.

   Thus, in the idealized case where causal coding succeeds perfectly and each context only adjusts
the factors it truly depends on, we obtain a commuting family of context updates for all contexts
that do not share causal support. The next subsection explains how to relax these conditions and
quantify approximate commutativity in terms of small locality errors and sparse overlaps between
supports.


                                                                 30
A.5    Categorical General Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem
We can now state a purely categorical version of the general theorem.

Theorem 4 (Categorical GCL, factorized form). Let (P, ⊗, I) be a symmetric monoidal category.
Let Θ ∈ Ob(P) admit a factorization Θ ∼= Θ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ΘK . Let {Ut : Θ → Θ}t∈T be a family of
context-conditioned update endomorphisms such that for each t:

  1. Ut is context-local with support St ⊆ {1, . . . , K} in the sense above; and

  2. the supports are causally minimal, i.e. no Ut contains within St a factor on which it acts as
     the identity while still being required to preserve performance in that context.

   Then for any finite multiset {t1 , . . . , tT } whose supports are pairwise disjoint ( Sti ∩ Stj =
∅ for i 6= j ), the corresponding updates commute (up to the canonical symmetry/associativity
isomorphisms):
                               Utσ(T ) ◦ · · · ◦ Utσ(1) ∼
                                                        = UtT ◦ · · · ◦ Ut1
for every permutation σ of {1, . . . , T }. Consequently, there is a well-defined joint multi-context
update
                                          UΣ := UtT ◦ · · · ◦ Ut1
independent (up to isomorphism) of the order in which the contexts are seen, i.e. no catastrophic
forgetting or interference among these contexts.

Idea of proof. By Lemma 2, any pair Uti , Utj with disjoint supports commutes up to canonical
isomorphism. The coherence axioms for symmetric monoidal categories ensure that these pairwise
commutations extend to arbitrary finite products: any two permutations of a tensor of commuting
endomorphisms are connected by a unique canonical isomorphism built out of symmetries and
associators. Applying this to the family {Ut1 , . . . , UtT } yields the claimed path-independence of
their composite.
    The causal minimality assumption rules out trivial factorizations where a context’s support is
artificially enlarged by inserting identity actions on extra factors; this matters when we connect
the abstract theorem back to the tradeoff results about independence versus explicit couplings and
to the “weakness” principle.

    In this categorical form, the role of causal modeling and causal coding is to engineer a factor-
ization Θ ∼
              N
           = k Θk and context-local updates Ut that satisfy the hypotheses of the theorem as well
as possible. The continuous-variable and discrete-variable specializations in the main text simply
instantiate P as, respectively, a category of smooth manifolds with smooth maps and a category of
finite sets (or graphs) with structure-preserving maps; the statement and the proof pattern remain
the same at a structural level. In the next subsection we move to an approximate formulation, in
which locality and commutativity are only satisfied up to explicit error terms and the conclusions
degrade smoothly with these errors.

A.6    Connection to the tradeoff between preprocessing and disentangling
The categorical picture also makes precise how the Route A vs. Route B tradeoff (preprocessing
for independence vs. internal disentangling) fits into continual learning across contexts.




                                                 31
   • Route A (preprocessing for independence). Here we choose the environment-to-causal-
     model functor J : E → C so that J(E) is as close as possible to a tensor product of weakly
     coupled factors, i.e. the causal graph for typical contexts is sparse and low-treewidth after
     appropriate interventions. Categorically, this is a choice of strong-monoidal structure on
     J that pushes correlation structure “upstream” into a small number of explicitly modeled
     couplings.
   • Route B (disentangling inside the learner). Here we keep J relatively generic and
     instead invest in a strong monoidal functor M : C → P and in the architecture of P so that Θ
     acquires an internal factorization aligned with the causal factors. This corresponds to making
     the update endomorphisms Ut as block-diagonal as possible in the monoidal decomposition.
    The tradeoff theorem says that any architecture attaining a given information-efficiency target
must, in effect, pay for independence either via Route A (more aggressive transforms and factor-
ization at the causal-model level) or Route B (more explicit multi-ary couplings and richer internal
disentangling). In categorical terms, both routes are choices about how strongly monoidal the
composite M ◦ J : E → P can be made, relative to the underlying dependency structure of the
environment.
    From the standpoint of Theorem 4, the key quantity is how close the actual Ut are to perfectly
context-local, factorwise endomorphisms. Route A improves this by simplifying the causal graph
before it reaches the learner; Route B improves it by restructuring the learner so that its parameter
object Θ realizes the causal product structure more faithfully. Causal coding is precisely the design
discipline of using both routes, guided by interventional influence, to enlarge the class of contexts
for which the hypotheses of the categorical GCL theorem are approximately satisfied, and hence
to enlarge the regime where continual learning works without catastrophic forgetting.

A.7     Approximate categorical CCL: enriched setting and confusing pairs
In practice the hypotheses of the categorical Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem never hold ex-
actly. Contexts are only approximately local to a subset of causal factors; supports only approx-
imately disjoint; and the induced update maps commute only approximately. What we want is a
statement of the form
      If the factorization / locality / commutativity assumptions are satisfied up to small
      errors, then path-dependence and forgetting are also small, with a dependence on those
      errors that is controlled and not catastrophically sensitive.
    This subsection sketches such an “approximate” version in a metric-enriched categorical setting,
and shows how the global error scales (i) linearly in the local errors of the premises and (ii) linearly
in the number of genuinely “confusing” context pairs. We then indicate how this plugs into the
causal-coding neural-net and incremental-compression instantiations.

A.7.1    Metric-enriched monoidal setting and approximate locality
We work in a symmetric monoidal category (P, ⊗, I) that is enriched over Lawvere metric spaces.
Concretely, we assume:
   • For each pair of objects X, Y there is a (pseudo-)metric
                               dX,Y : HomP (X, Y ) × HomP (X, Y ) → [0, ∞)
      and we write dX for dX,X on endomorphisms of X.

                                                  32
   • Composition is non-expansive in each argument:

                       dZ (V ◦ U, V ◦ U 0 ) ≤ dY (U, U 0 ),        dZ (U ◦ V, U 0 ◦ V ) ≤ dX (U, U 0 )

      whenever the composites are defined.

   • The monoidal product is also non-expansive:

                          dX⊗X 0 ,Y ⊗Y 0 (U ⊗ U 0 , V ⊗ V 0 ) ≤ dX,Y (U, V ) + dX 0 ,Y 0 (U 0 , V 0 ).

   As before, we fix a parameter object

                                               Θ∼
                                                = Θ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ΘK

and regard EndP (Θ) as a metric monoid with metric dΘ . Contexts c ∈ C act at the learner level
via endomorphisms
                                        Uc : Θ → Θ.
    In the exact theorem, each Uc factors as a tensor product of per-factor maps that are identities
outside a support Sc ⊆ {1, . . . , K}, and updates for contexts with disjoint supports commute
strictly. To move to the approximate case, we introduce:

Definition 4 (Approximate context-locality). Given a factorization Θ ∼      = Θ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ΘK , a context
c has intended support Sc ⊆ {1, . . . , K} if there exists an “ideal” local update

                                        Vc ∼
                                           = Vc(1) ⊗ · · · ⊗ Vc(K) : Θ → Θ
        (k)
with Vc       = idΘk for all k ∈
                               / Sc , such that the actual learner update Uc satisfies

                                                  dΘ (Uc , Vc ) ≤ εc .

We call εc ≥ 0 the locality error for context c.

   We also assume each Uc is non-expansive with respect to dΘ (this is automatic if it is built from
non-expansive primitives in P).

A.7.2     Pairwise commutator defects and confusing pairs
The “defect of commutativity” for a pair of contexts c, c0 at the ideal level is

                                          ∆c,c0 := dΘ (Vc ◦ Vc0 , Vc0 ◦ Vc ).

In the exact factorized theorem, ∆c,c0 = 0 whenever the supports Sc and Sc0 are disjoint. In practice,
these defects are small but nonzero whenever contexts overlap weakly or the factorization is only
approximate.
    A first observation is that the commutator of the actual updates is controlled by the locality
errors and the ideal commutator:

Lemma 3 (Approximate pairwise commutativity). For any two contexts c, c0 ,
                                            
                      dΘ Uc ◦ Uc0 , Uc0 ◦ Uc ≤ 2(εc + εc0 ) + ∆c,c0 .



                                                          33
Sketch. Expand Uc and Uc0 around Vc , Vc0 and use non-expansiveness plus the triangle inequality:
                dΘ (Uc ◦ Uc0 , Uc0 ◦ Uc ) ≤ dΘ (Uc ◦ Uc0 , Vc ◦ Uc0 ) + dΘ (Vc ◦ Uc0 , Vc ◦ Vc0 )
                                            + dΘ (Vc ◦ Vc0 , Vc0 ◦ Vc ) + dΘ (Vc0 ◦ Vc , Vc0 ◦ Uc )
                                            + dΘ (Vc0 ◦ Uc , Uc0 ◦ Uc )
                                         ≤ εc + εc0 + ∆c,c0 + εc + εc0 ,
using non-expansiveness to pull dΘ (Uc0 , Vc0 ) and dΘ (Uc , Vc ) out of composites. Collecting terms
gives the claim.
   This suggests defining a per-pair confusion cost
                                         δc,c0 := 2(εc + εc0 ) + ∆c,c0 ,
and calling a pair (c, c0 ) confusing if δc,c0 exceeds some small threshold τpair . Intuitively, confus-
ing pairs are ones where either the contexts share significant causal support or the approximate
factorization is poor.

A.7.3    Approximate CCL with linear dependence on confusing pairs
Consider a finite multiset of contexts
                                               Σ = {c1 , . . . , cT }
and the associated family of updates Uci : Θ → Θ. For any permutation σ of {1, . . . , T }, write
                                         Uσ := Ucσ(T ) ◦ · · · ◦ Ucσ(1) .
Fix once and for all a canonical ordering of contexts (for instance by some index) and let σcan be
the permutation that lists the multiset Σ in that canonical order; write Ucan := Uσcan .
    The key combinatorial fact is that any permutation can be transformed into the canonical one
by a sequence of adjacent swaps, and we can choose this sequence so that every unordered pair of
indices (i, j) is swapped at most once (this is just the usual sorting-by-inversions picture). Using
Lemma 3, each adjacent swap of Uci and Ucj changes the overall composite by at most δci ,cj in the
metric dΘ . Summing over the swaps then gives:
Theorem 5 (Approximate categorical CCL with confusing pairs). Let (P, ⊗, I) be a symmetric
monoidal category enriched over Lawvere metric spaces as above, and let Θ ∼   = Θ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ΘK .
Suppose each context c has an intended support Sc and an ideal local update Vc with locality error
εc , and define confusion costs δc,c0 as above.
     For any finite multiset of contexts Σ = {c1 , . . . , cT }, let
                                         
                            Econf (Σ) := {i, j} : 1 ≤ i < j ≤ T, δci ,cj > 0
be the set of unordered confusing pairs among these contexts. Then there is a constant CP (depend-
ing only on the enrichment constants of P) such that for any permutation σ,
                                                      X
                                dΘ Uσ , Ucan ≤ CP              δci ,cj .
                                                           {i,j}∈Econf (Σ)

   In particular, if we put a uniform bound δci ,cj ≤ δ and write M := |Econf (Σ)| for the number of
confusing pairs, then                              
                                     dΘ Uσ , Ucan ≤ CP δ M,
so the path-dependence error grows at most linearly in the number of confusing pairs and linearly
in the pairwise commutator/locality errors.

                                                        34
Idea of proof. As in the exact case, the composite Uσ changes only when adjacent factors are
swapped. For any adjacent swap exchanging Uci and Ucj , Lemma 3 and non-expansiveness of pre-
and post-composition give
                                                                             
                     dΘ · · · ◦ Ucj ◦ Uci ◦ · · · , · · · ◦ Uci ◦ Ucj ◦ · · · ≤ CP δci ,cj

for some fixed CP that depends only on the enrichment constants. Now sort σ to σcan by adjacent
swaps using any sorting algorithm that realizes each inversion pair (i, j) at most once (for example:
repeatedly bubble the correct element into position 1, then 2, etc.; once an element is in place it
never moves again).
    Each unordered pair {i, j} that is already in canonical relative order is never swapped; each
pair that is out of order is swapped exactly once. The total change in the composite between σ
and σcan is thus bounded by the sum of CP δci ,cj over those pairs that are actually swapped, which
is a subset of Econf (Σ). This gives the stated bound.

    Conceptually: the approximate categorical premises amount to small locality errors εc and small
ideal commutator defects ∆c,c0 for most pairs. The theorem says that the resulting path-dependence
and forgetting error depends smoothly (indeed, linearly) on those premise-errors, and only for the
pairs of contexts that actually interact in a confusing way. In the worst case, when every pair is
confusing, M = O(T 2 ) and we recover the familiar quadratic dependence. But in many realistic
regimes the confusion graph is sparse, and M scales like O(T ) or O(T log T ) instead.
    Probabilistic variants are immediate: if the εc and ∆c,c0 are random with small expectations
(or tails), then linearity plus the triangle inequality gives corresponding expectation and high-
probability bounds on dΘ (Uσ , Ucan ).

A.7.4   Connection to causal-coding neural networks
In the PC/CC neural-network instantiation, we can take:

   • Objects of P to be parameter manifolds (or Euclidean parameter spaces) equipped with a
     metric dΘ that measures performance distance, for example a supremum over per-task loss
     differences:
                                 dΘ (θ, θ0 ) := sup Lc (θ) − Lc (θ0 ) .
                                                 c∈C

   • Morphisms to be update operators (gradient steps, PC-style inference/learning updates), and
     enrichment to come from Lipschitz continuity of the training dynamics under this metric.

   • The factorization Θ ∼= Θ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ΘK to be a block decomposition into modules (layers, heads,
     slots, routing blocks) engineered by causal coding.

   • Locality errors εc to measure how much updating on context c perturbs layers that have neg-
     ligible do-influence for c (for example, via norms of gradients or influence-function estimates
     on non-support modules).

   • Ideal commutator defects ∆c,c0 (or their surrogates) to be controlled by mixed Hessian blocks
     or Lie brackets of gradient vector fields:
                                                                    
                            [gc , gc0 ] ≈ 0 ⇒ dΘ Uc ◦ Uc0 , Uc0 ◦ Uc small.




                                                 35
    From this viewpoint, the approximate categorical theorem says: if causal coding succeeds in
making cross-context mixed Hessians small outside a sparse pattern of genuinely interacting context
pairs, and if updates on a context mostly stay within its do-influence support, then sequential
PC/CC training behaves almost like joint training. The deviation scales linearly with (i) the
magnitude of the mixed Hessian / commutator terms and (ii) the number of context pairs for
which those terms are non-negligible.
    Operationally, this gives an architecture- and data-dependent way to estimate how far one is
from the ideal continual-learning regime: measure empirical εc and pairwise commutator proxies for
a sample of contexts, build an approximate confusion graph, and then plug those into Theorem 5
to bound the expected path-dependence of training.

A.7.5    Connection to incremental compression and IC-based causal coding
In the incremental-compression setting, we already have an explicit metric

                                 d(Θ, Θ0 ) := sup Lc (Θ) − Lc (Θ0 )
                                              c∈C

on feature libraries, and the context updates Uc were assumed 1-Lipschitz with respect to d. The
factorization Θ ∼
                = Θ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ΘK is given by the modular decomposition of the feature library, and
the context-locality and small-overlap assumptions translate directly into:

    • locality errors εc controlled by leakage outside the support modules (εleak in the IC-CCL
      theorem);
    • pairwise commutator bounds δc,c0 controlled by cross-context incremental compression overlap
      (εoverlap and the clarity penalty).

    The “Incremental-compression CCL” theorem can thus be read as a concrete instance of The-
orem 5: the metric-enriched category is the category of feature libraries with d-non-expansive
incremental-compression updates; the supports Sc are given by do-influence on modules; and the
confusion graph encodes which pairs of contexts actually share significant compressive structure.
The linear-in-T 2 bounds in the earlier discrete statement are the worst-case specialization where
every pair is potentially confusing. When the confusion graph is sparse, applying the approximate
categorical theorem tightens this to linear dependence on the number of confusing pairs, exactly as
in the neural setting.
    In both the neural and IC cases, the moral is the same: causal coding tries to engineer a world
in which (i) most contexts are approximately local to small supports, and (ii) only a sparse set of
context pairs share substantial causal/compressive structure. The approximate categorical CCL
theorem then guarantees that, in such a world, continual learning is robust: the errors induced by
approximate factorization and nonzero commutators accumulate in a controlled, essentially linear
way, rather than exploding combinatorially with the total number of contexts.


B     Illustrative example: causal coding in a PC Transformer with
      overlapping textual contexts
Here we walk through a hypothetical example of causal coding in a PC transformer, at a moderate
level of detail.
    In real life, a single prompt can blend instructions, narrative, mathematics, programming,
and social chit-chat. So one cannot think about discrete task types but needs to think in terms of

                                                 36
contexts: soft, overlapping regions in a high-dimensional space of situations that shape what counts
as good prediction.
    Here we sketch how causal coding might operate in a PC Transformer in the presence of such
overlapping contexts, and how this still fits the general causal-continual-learning picture.

B.1    Two fuzzy, overlapping contexts
Consider a PC Transformer trained on mixed internet text. Among many possible contexts, focus
on two qualitative ones:

   • a technical-math context cmath in which the model is expected to manipulate formulas, perform
     small derivations, and keep symbols consistent;

   • a conversational-explanation context cexplain in which the model is expected to speak in a
     friendly, informal tone and adapt to the user’s wording.

   These are not disjoint: a prompt like

      “Can you walk me through how to solve a quadratic equation step by step, but in a
      casual way as if you were explaining to a friend?”

   sits in the overlap. It simultaneously demands mathematically correct symbolic reasoning
(pulling toward cmath ) and informal, dialogue-like phrasing (pulling toward cexplain ).
   We can formalize this by associating to each input sequence x a context embedding c(x) ∈ Rd
and a soft context mixture wc (x) over a small dictionary of prototypical contexts {cα }α∈A :
                                      X                        X
                         wα (x) ≥ 0,      wα (x) = 1, c(x) ≈       wα (x) cα .
                                      α∈A                        α

For our running example, A would contain at least cmath and cexplain , and the prompt above would
yield some nontrivial mixture wmath (x), wexplain (x) ∈ (0, 1).

B.2    Context-conditioned do-influence at the head/channel level
In a PC Transformer, each layer ` has multiple self-attention heads h = 1, . . . , H` and feed-forward
channels. Predictive coding endows these with latent “value” nodes z (`,h) and local error units ε(`) ,
updated via inference dynamics until a fixed point is reached.
    Causal coding adds an interventional layer to this picture:

  1. For a given input x, run PC inference to an equilibrium {z (`,h) (x), ε(`) (x)}.

  2. Define context-conditioned error functionals that emphasize different aspects of the prediction
     quality. For example,

                   Lmath (x) = loss on tokens classified as formulas / code / numeric,

          Lexplain (x) = loss on tokens in natural-language explanations, style constraints, etc.
      These are not separate training runs; they are different ways of reading the same prediction
      trace through different lenses.



                                                  37
  3. For each head (`, h) and each prototypical context α ∈ A, estimate an interventional influence

                          (α)    ∂                                                   
                     C`,h ≈             Lα equilibrium under do(z (`,h) ← z (`,h) + δ) .
                                ∂ δ δ=0
                    (α)
      In practice, C`,h is obtained via a Schur-Fisher, natural-gradient, or Schrödinger-bridge sur-
      rogate rather than literal finite differences, but conceptually it measures: “if I nudge this
      head, how much does context-α loss change after PC relaxation?”

  4. Turn these influences into context-specific gates on head (`, h):
                                               (α)
                                 (α)         |C`,h |p
                                r`,h   = P     (α) p
                                                            ,   p ∈ [1, 2], κ > 0.
                                          h0 |C`,h0 | + κ


    Now, when we process a particular input x with soft context weights wα (x), we define an
effective gate for each head:
                                                       (α)
                                            X
                                 r`,h (x) =    wα (x) r`,h .
                                                     α∈A

These gates modulate both inference (how much the head’s latent activity is allowed to move in
response to errors) and learning (how strongly we update that head’s parameters on this example).
    Intuitively, a “math-logic” head that carries strong influence on Lmath but little on Lexplain will
       (math)     (explain)
have r`,h      r`,h        . For a purely conversational prompt, wmath (x) ≈ 0, so that head is mostly
frozen. For a purely technical derivation, wmath (x) ≈ 1, so the head learns aggressively. For a
blended prompt, it receives an intermediate weight.

B.3    Overlapping contexts and approximate modularity
Crucially, we never assume that contexts are disjoint or that examples belong to a single context.
Instead:

   • Each context α exposes one direction in loss space, given by Lα , and one pattern of head/
                        (α)
     channel influence C`,h .

   • Causal coding attempts to find a representation in which each context α is supported mostly
     by a relatively small subset of heads/channels (its “support”), and in which mixed influence
     terms across very different contexts are small (weak cross-Hessian blocks).

   • The soft mixture wα (x) simply interpolates between these context-specific supports at training
     time.

   In a mature model we might see, for example:

   • A cluster of heads in middle layers that are heavily used whenever wmath (x) is large (they
     encode algebraic patterns, symbol matching, and numeric regularities), and are mostly gated
     off for conversational small talk.

   • Another cluster of heads that activate whenever wexplain (x) is large (they track pronouns,
     politeness, discourse markers, etc.), and are only weakly involved in raw formula manipulation.



                                                     38
   • A small overlapping subset of “bridge” heads that respond to both contexts: they know how
     to wrap a derivation in a friendly explanation or how to embed a formula inside a sentence.
     Their influence appears in both C (math) and C (explain) , but even here causal coding tries to
     keep their effects disentangled (e.g. separate subchannels for content vs style).
    From the perspective of the General Causal-Continual-Learning Theorem, each prototypical
context α defines an update operator Uα (or a gradient field Xα ) corresponding to optimizing Lα
with context-specific gates. The causal-coding machinery pushes these operators to be context-
local : Uα mostly adjusts the head/channel modules that have strong C (α) influence, leaving others
nearly fixed. This is exactly the “small residual gradient and small cross-Hessian” condition in
the manifold version of the theorem, or the “almost identity outside support” condition in the
discrete and categorical versions, up to the approximate error terms made explicit in the enriched
categorical setting.
    In the overlapping example:
   • On pure math prompts, Umath is active and mostly acts on the math-logic heads; Uexplain is
     nearly the identity.
   • On pure conversational prompts, the roles reverse.
   • On blended prompts, both operators act, but because their supports are largely distinct (with
     a small, carefully-structured overlap), their gradient flows almost commute. Doing a “math
     update” then an “explanation update” is nearly the same as doing them in the opposite
     order, and both are close to a joint step on Lmath + Lexplain . The residual non-commutativity
     is controlled by the pairwise confusion costs between these two contexts.
    Thus, even without any hard partition of training into separate tasks, the model can achieve
continual-learning-like robustness with respect to contexts: improving its behavior for one slice of
the prompt space (e.g. technical-math) will not dramatically degrade its behavior for another slice
(e.g. conversational explanation), as long as causal coding keeps their effective modules weakly
entangled and the confusion graph remains sparse.

B.4    Why this does not require discrete context labels
The story above used two named contexts for clarity, but the machinery does not require explicit
labels. In practice one can:
   • maintain a small bank of context prototypes cα discovered unsupervised (for example via
     clustering of prompts or of error patterns);
   • define Lα by reweighting the same underlying token-level loss with attention to different
     subsets of tokens or features;
   • estimate do-influences C (α) and gates r(α) for these prototypes, then let wα (x) be inferred by
     a learned context encoder.
    The key requirement for the general theorem is not that the contexts be named or sharply de-
fined, but that the resulting family of context-conditioned update operators {Uα } be approximately
local in a shared causal factorization of the Transformer. Causal coding at the head and channel
level is precisely the mechanism that tries to enforce this: it continuously re-arranges and prunes
the internal structure so that context-conditioned gradients stay as factorized as the data allow,
making the corresponding flows nearly commuting and, therefore, making context-wise continual
learning robust in the approximate sense formalized by the enriched categorical CCL theorem.

                                                 39
C     Asymptotic equivalence and acceleration of causal IC
We now explore the nature of the advantage obtained by augmenting standard incremental com-
pression with causal coding type methodologies. Throughout this section we explicitly restrict
attention to a best-case regime in which there exists a feature library that is both globally optimal
for plain incremental compression and perfectly modular according to the clarity penalty. Outside
this regime, plain IC and causal IC will in general converge to different optima, and the analysis
here does not apply directly; instead, causal IC then trades off some raw compression performance
for improved modularity and continual-learning behavior.
    At a high level, incremental compression with causal coding (IC+CC) is meant to change how
the learner gets to its long-run feature library, not what it can ultimately represent.
    • A plain IC learner maintains a single global feature library and keeps adding/refitting features
      to minimize expected two-part code length across all contexts. Nothing stops it from letting
      the same feature do double duty for multiple unrelated contexts, or from letting older features
      slowly drift as it tries to accommodate new contexts.
    • A causal IC learner uses do-influence and clarity penalties to nudge the search toward modular
      libraries: features are grouped into modules that mainly serve particular context families (plus
      possibly a “shared” module), and cross-context, cross-module overlap is actively discouraged.
    If the environment really has an underlying modular structure, there should be (at least one)
representation that is both globally code-length optimal and perfectly modular. In that case, adding
a clarity penalty does not change what the best long-run solution is; it only makes the learner
prefer paths that get there via modular libraries instead of entangled ones. The picture we want is:
      Plain IC and causal IC converge (in the limit) to the same optimal incremental code,
      but causal IC converges faster in a multi-context setting because the clarity penalty im-
      proves the local curvature (condition number) of the optimization problem and shrinks
      cross-context interference.
    Below we state a simple version of this, in the same spirit as the discrete/categorical CCL
theorem, but now with an explicit comparison between plain IC and IC+CC. We emphasize again
that this theorem is conditional on the existence of a modular optimum that is also globally optimal
for plain IC; in more general situations, regularization by R moves the optimum and the leading
effect of IC+CC is to bias the learner toward different, more modular solutions.

Setup: average loss and clarity penalty. Let C be a family of contexts c, each with a distri-
bution Pc over {0, 1}N . Let π be a mixing distribution over contexts (the long-run frequency with
which contexts appear). A feature library state is Θ = (Θ1 , . . . , ΘK ) where each Θk is a module as
in the previous subsection.
    For a library Θ and context c, let Lc (Θ) be the expected two-part description length on Pc
given Θ, using some fixed incremental-coding search (greedy-with-refit, beam+refit, or PGM-guided
search). Define the long-run average code length
                                       F (Θ) := Ec∼π [Lc (Θ)].
    To measure lack of modularity across contexts, we use a clarity penalty R(Θ) of the kind
introduced earlier: for each feature f we track per-context gains γc (f ) and set
                                X                                   X
                Overlap(f ) :=     min{γc (f ), γc0 (f )}, R(Θ) :=        Overlap(f ),
                               c6=c0                                 f ∈Θ


                                                  40
optionally normalized. Intuitively, R(Θ) is large when many features carry significant mass for
many different, potentially unrelated contexts.
   We consider two learners on the same environment:

   • Plain IC. Updates the library by approximately minimizing F (Θ) (via incremental search
     and refitting), with no explicit clarity penalty.

   • Causal IC (IC+CC). Updates the library by approximately minimizing

                                         Fλ (Θ) := F (Θ) + λR(Θ)

     for some fixed λ > 0 (or a slowly varying schedule λt ). Gates and freezing outside the
     context support Sc (Θ) implement the “approximately minimizing Fλ ” part, as in the previous
     incremental-CC update rule.

    We compare the long-run behaviour of these two learners under the following idealized assump-
tions.

Assumptions.
  1. SF-HGM with modular optimum. Strings in each context c are generated by a short-
     feature hierarchical generative model (SF-HGM) with cross-information bound δ, so that
     there exist high-efficiency incremental decompositions with short features and small overlaps.
     Moreover, there exists at least one library Θ? such that:

        • Θ? globally minimizes F (Θ);
        • Θ? is perfectly modular in the sense that all strong features for context c live in its
          support modules Sc (Θ? ), and each feature either serves a small family of related contexts
          or a dedicated “shared” module;
        • this modularity is exactly what R rewards: R(Θ? ) = 0 and R(Θ) > 0 for all Θ 6= Θ?
          with F (Θ) ≤ F (Θ? ) + O(log N ).

  2. Smoothness and local strong convexity. In a neighbourhood N of Θ? , the average
     loss F (Θ) admits a smooth surrogate F̃ (Θ) (think: differentiable meta-objective over feature
     parameters) with L-Lipschitz gradient and strong convexity constant µ > 0. Likewise R
     admits a smooth surrogate R̃ with LR -Lipschitz gradient and Hessian ∇2 R̃(Θ? )  νI on the
     “entanglement directions” (those that change cross-context overlaps but not F to first order).

  3. Shared optimum. For all λ in a range [0, λmax ], the combined objective F̃λ := F̃ + λR̃
     has the same unique minimizer Θ? on N . (This is enforced by the “modular optimum”
     assumption: Θ? is the only point that simultaneously minimizes F and R in that region.)

  4. IC updates approximate gradient steps. Both plain IC and IC+CC implement stochas-
     tic update rules of the form

                                     Θt+1 = Θt − ηt (∇F̃ (Θt ) + ξt ),

                             Θcc     cc            cc          cc     cc
                              t+1 = Θt − ηt (∇F̃ (Θt ) + λ∇R̃(Θt ) + ξt ),

     where {ξt } and {ξtcc } are martingale-noise terms coming from finite samples and approximate
     search, withPbounded variance;    and the step sizes satisfy standard stochastic-approximation
     conditions t ηt = ∞, t ηt2 < ∞.
                               P


                                                 41
Theorem (Asymptotic equivalence and acceleration of causal IC).                Under Assumptions
1-4 above, and for any fixed λ ∈ (0, λmax ], the following hold:

  1. Same asymptotic optimum. Both plain IC and causal IC converge (in probability, or
     almost surely under standard stochastic-approximation conditions) to the same modular op-
     timum Θ? :
                                      Θt → Θ? ,     Θcc
                                                     t →Θ .
                                                            ?


     In particular, in the long run IC+CC learns the same SF-HGM structure as plain IC (up
     to the usual incremental-compression non-uniqueness). This does not hold in general; it is
     specific to the special case where Θ? simultaneously minimizes both F and R.

  2. Improved local curvature. In the neighbourhood N , the Hessian of F̃λ satisfies

                             ∇2 F̃λ (Θ) = ∇2 F̃ (Θ) + λ∇2 R̃(Θ)  (µ + λν)I

     on the entanglement directions, while its gradient is (L + λLR )-Lipschitz. Thus F̃λ has an
     improved condition number
                                             L + λLR   L
                                    κcc :=           ≤   =: κplain ,
                                              µ + λν   µ
     with strict inequality whenever ν > 0 and λ > 0.

  3. Faster linear convergence rate (in the noise-free limit). Consider for simplicity noise-
     less gradient descent with a fixed step size η ∈ (0, 2/(L + λLR )). Then

                              kΘt+1 − Θ? k ≤ (1 − ηµ) kΘt − Θ? k,
                              kΘcc     ?                      cc   ?
                                t+1 − Θ k ≤ (1 − η(µ + λν)) kΘt − Θ k.

     Since µ + λν > µ, the causal-IC iterates contract toward Θ? strictly faster:

                   kΘcc   ?
                     t − Θ k . exp(−t η(µ + λν)),          kΘt − Θ? k . exp(−t ηµ).
                                                                                √
     With stochastic noise present, the same comparison holds up to the usual O( ηt ) fluctuation
     terms.

Interpretation.    The assumptions are idealized and reflect a best-case regime:

   • SF-HGM plus “modular optimum” says that there really is a representation in which each
     context family uses its own subset of modules, with only genuinely shared structure kept
     in shared modules, and that this representation is already near-optimal in plain IC’s sense.
     This is not guaranteed in general; when no such perfectly modular optimum exists, plain IC
     and IC+CC will converge to (typically different) local optima that trade off raw compression
     against modularity.

   • The clarity penalty R is chosen so that it is minimized exactly at such modular representations
     and penalizes cross-context, cross-module overlap. Thus, under Assumption 3, adding λR
     does not move the location of the best solution, it just increases curvature in directions that
     correspond to entangling contexts.



                                                 42
   • In that regime, IC+CC behaves like a preconditioned version of plain IC: it has the same
     fixed point Θ? , but the local condition number of its objective is smaller, so gradient-like
     updates converge faster in the multi-context setting.

    Intuitively: if you run plain incremental compression long enough on many contexts, you will,
under SF-HGM assumptions and the existence of a modular global optimum, eventually discover
a good hierarchy of features. Adding causal coding and clarity does not change what the best
hierarchy is under those assumptions; it just biases the search so that features which mix unrelated
contexts are disfavored early, and context-local modules emerge faster. The CCL-style almost-
commuting update results then give you better continual-learning behavior en route, on top of
this accelerated convergence. Outside this special regime, IC+CC converges to a different, more
modular optimum than plain IC, and the analysis here should be read as a local picture around
hypothetical modular solutions rather than a universal convergence claim.




                                                43
